The Books of Enoch
The Book of Enoch (Enoch 1)
The book of the secrets of Enoch (Enoch 2)
The hebrew book of Enoch (Enoch 3)
2010
Introduction
The Book of Enoch (also 1 Enoch[1]) is an ancient Jewish religious work, ascribed to
Enoch, the great-grandfather of Noah. It is not regarded as scripture by Jews or any
Christian group, apart from the Ethiopian Orthodox Church, which to this day regards it
to be canonical.
Western scholars currently assert that its older sections (mainly in the Book of the
Watchers) date from about 300 BC and the latest part (Book of Parables) probably was
composed at the end of the 1st century BC.[2] However, Ethiopian scholars generally
hold that Ge'ez is the language of the original from which the Greek and Aramaic copies
were made, pointing out that it is the only language in which the complete text has yet
been found[3].
It is wholly extant only in the Ge'ez language, with Aramaic fragments from the Dead
Sea Scrolls and a few Greek and Latin fragments. There is no consensus among
Western scholars about the original language: some propose Aramaic, others Hebrew,
while the probable thesis according to E. Isaac is that 1 Enoch, as Daniel, was composed
partially in Aramaic and partially in Hebrew[4]:6.
A short section of 1 Enoch (1En1:9) is quoted in the New Testament (Letter of Jude
1:14-15), and there apparently attributed to "Enoch the Seventh from Adam" (1En60:8).
It is argued that all the writers of the New Testament were familiar with it and were
influenced by it in thought and diction.[5] The first part of Book of Enoch describes the
fall of the Watchers, the angels who fathered the Nephilim. The remainder of the book
describes Enoch's visits to Heaven in the form of travels, visions and dreams, and his
revelations.
The book consists of five quite distinct major sections (see each section for details):
The Book of the Watchers (1 Enoch 1 – 36)
The Book of Parables of Enoch (1 Enoch 37 – 71) (Also called the Similitudes of
Enoch)
The Astronomical Book (1 Enoch 72 – 82) (Also called the Book of the Heavenly
Luminaries or Book of Luminaries. )
The Book of Dream Visions (1 Enoch 83 – 90) (Also called the Book of Dreams)
The Epistle of Enoch (1 Enoch 91 – 108)
The shared view[6] is that these five sections were originally independent works (with
different dates of composition), themselves a product of much editorial arrangement,
and were only later redacted into what we now call 1 Enoch. This view is now opposed
only by a few authors who maintain the literary integrity of the Book of Enoch, one of
2
the most recent (1990) being the Ethiopian Wossenie Yifru[3]. Józef Milik has
suggested that the Book of Giants found amongst the Dead Sea Scrolls should be part of
the collection, appearing after the Book of Watchers in place of the Book of Parables,
but for various reasons Milik's theory has not been widely accepted.
Canonicity in Judaism
Although evidently widely known at the time of the Development of the Jewish Bible
canon, 1Enoch was excluded from both the formal canon of the Tanakh and the typical
canon of the Septuagint and therefore also the writings known today as the
Apocrypha.[7] [8] One possible reason for Jewish rejection of the book might be the
textual nature of several early sections of the book which make use of material from the
Torah, for example 1En1 is a midrash of Deuteronomy 33. [9][10]. The content,
particularly detailed description of fallen angels, would also be a reason for rejection
from the Hebrew canon at this period - as illustrated by the comments of Trypho the
Jew when debating with Justin Martyr on this subject. Trypho: "The utterances of God
are holy, but your expositions are mere contrivances, as is plain from what has been
explained by you; nay, even blasphemies, for you assert that angels sinned and revolted
from God." (Dialogue 79) [11]
3
THE
BOOK OF ENOCH
translation by M. Knibb of the Ethiopian text in the
S.O.A.S. Library at the University of London.
Section I. Chapters I-XXXVI
BOOK OF THE WATCHERS
1.1 These are the words of the
blessing of Enoch; according to which
he blessed the chosen and righteous
who must be present on the day of
distress, which is appointed, for the
removal of all the wicked and impious.
1.2 And Enoch began his story and said:
-
There was a righteous man whose eyes
were opened by the Lord, and he saw a
Holy vision in the Heavens, which the
Angels showed to me. And I heard
everything from them, and I understood
what I saw: but not for this generation,
but for a distant generation that will
come.
1.3 Concerning the Chosen I spoke; and
I uttered a parable concerning them:
The Holy and Great One will come out
of his dwelling.
1.4 And the Eternal God will tread from
there upon Mount Sinai, and he will
appear with his Host, and will appear in
the strength of his power from Heaven.
1.5 And all will be afraid, and the
Watchers will shake, and fear and great
trembling will seize them, up to the
ends of the earth.
1.6 And the high mountains will be
shaken; and the high hills will be laid
low and will melt like wax in a flame.
1.7 And the earth will sink, and
everything that is on the earth will be
destroyed, and there will be judgment
upon all, and upon all the righteous.
1.8 But for the righteous: He will make
peace, and He will keep safe the
Chosen, and mercy will be upon them.
They will all belong to God, and will
prosper and be blessed, and the light of
God will shine on them.
1.9 And behold! He comes with ten
thousand Holy Ones; to execute
judgment upon them and to destroy the
impious, and to contend with all flesh
concerning everything that the sinners
and the impious have done and wrought
against Him.
2.1 Contemplate all the events in the
sky; how the lights in the sky do not
change their courses, how each rises and
sets in order, each at its proper time, and
they do not transgress their law.
2.2 Consider the earth and understand
from the work that is done upon it, from
the beginning to the end, that no work
of God changes as it becomes manifest.
2.3 Consider the summer and the
winter; how the whole earth is full of
water and the clouds and dew and rain
rest upon it.
3.1 Contemplate and see how all the
trees appear withered and all their
leaves are stripped - with the exception
of the fourteen trees, which are not
stripped, which remain with the old
leaves until the new come after two or
three years.
4.1 And, again, contemplate the days
of summer; how at its beginning the
Sun is above it. You seek shelter and
shade because of the heat of the Sun and
the earth burns with scorching heat, and
you cannot tread upon the earth or upon
a rock, because of its heat.
4
5.1 Contemplate how the trees are
covered with green leaves and bear
fruit. And understand, in respect of
everything, and perceive how He Who
Lives Forever made all these things for
you.
5.2 And how His works are before Him
in each succeeding year, and all His
works serve Him and do not change; but
as God has decreed - so everything is
done.
5.3 And consider how the seas and
rivers together complete their tasks.
5.4 But you have not persevered in, nor
observed, the Law of the Lord. But you
have transgressed and have spoken
proud and hard words with your unclean
mouth against his majesty. You hard of
heart! You will not have peace!
5.5 And because of this you will curse
your days, and the years of your life you
will destroy. And the eternal curse will
increase and you will not receive mercy.
5.6 In those days, you will transform
your name into an eternal curse to all
the righteous. And they will curse you
sinners forever.
5.7 For the chosen; there will be light,
joy, and peace, and they will inherit the
earth. But for you, the impious, there
will be a curse.
5.8 When wisdom is given to the chosen
they will all live, and will not again do
wrong, either through forgetfulness, or
through pride. But those who possess
wisdom will be humble.
5.9 They will not again do wrong, and
they will not be judged in all the days of
their life, and they will not die of wrath
or anger. But they will complete the
number of the days of their life. And
their life will grow in peace, and the
years of their joy will increase in
gladness and eternal peace; all the days
of their life.
6.1 And it came to pass, when the sons
of men had increased, that in those days
there were born to them fair and
beautiful daughters.
6.2 And the Angels, the sons of Heaven,
saw them and desired them. And they
said to one another: "Come, let us
choose for ourselves wives, from the
children of men, and let us beget, for
ourselves, children."
6.3 And Semyaza, who was their leader,
said to them:
"I fear that you may not wish this deed
to be done and that I alone will pay for
this great sin."
6.4 And they all answered him, and
said:
"Let us all swear an oath, and bind oneanother with curses, so not to alter this
plan, but to carry out this plan
effectively."
6.5 Then they all swore together and all
bound one another with curses to it.
6.6 And they were, in all, two hundred
and they came down on Ardis, which is
the summit of Mount Hermon. And
they called the mountain Hermon
because on it they swore and bound one
another with curses.
6.7 And these are the names of their
leaders:
Semyaza, who was their leader, Urakiba
(Araqiel) , Rameel, Kokabiel, Tamiel,
Ramiel, Daniel, Ezeqiel, Baraqiel,
Asael, Armaros, Batariel, Ananel,
Zaqiel, Samsiel, Satariel, Turiel,
Yomiel, Sariel. (see Ch 8 & Ch 69)
6.8 These are the leaders of the two
hundred Angels and of all the others
with them.
7.1 And they took wives for
themselves and everyone chose for
himself one each. And they began to go
into them and were promiscuous with
them. And they taught them charms
and spells, and they showed them the
cutting of roots and trees.
7.2 And they became pregnant and bore
large giants. And their height was three
thousand cubits.
2
7.3 These devoured all the toil of men;
until men were unable to sustain them.
7.4 And the giants turned against them
in order to devour men.
7.5 And they began to sin against birds,
and against animals, and against
reptiles, and against fish, and they
devoured one another's flesh, and drank
the blood from it.
7.6 Then the Earth complained about
the lawless ones.
8.1 And Azazel taught men to make
swords, and daggers, and shields, and
breastplates. And he showed them the
things after these, and the art of making
them; bracelets, and ornaments, and the
art of making up the eyes, and of
beautifying the eyelids, and the most
precious stones, and all kinds of
coloured dyes. And the world was
changed.
8.2 And there was great impiety, and
much fornication, and they went astray,
and all their ways became corrupt.
8.3 Amezarak taught all those who cast
spells and cut roots, Armaros the release
of spells, and Baraqiel astrologers, and
Kokabiel portents, and Tamiel taught
astrology, and Asradel taught the path
of the Moon.
8.4 And at the destruction of men they
cried out; and their voices reached
Heaven.
9.1 And then Michael, Gabriel, Suriel
and Uriel, looked down from Heaven
and saw the mass of blood that was
being shed on the earth and all the
iniquity that was being done on the
earth.
9.2 And they said to one another: "Let
the devastated Earth cry out with the
sound of their cries, up to the Gate of
Heaven.
9.3 And now to you, Oh Holy Ones of
Heaven, the souls of men complain,
saying: "Bring our complaint before the
Most High."
9.4 And they said to their Lord, the
King: "Lord of Lords, God of Gods,
King of Kings! Your glorious throne
endures for all the generations of the
world, and blessed and praised!
9.5 You have made everything, and
power over everything is yours. And
everything is uncovered, and open, in
front of you, and you see everything,
and there is nothing that can be hidden
from you.
9.6 See then what Azazel has done; how
he has taught all iniquity on the earth
and revealed the eternal secrets that are
made in Heaven.
9.7 And Semyaza has made known
spells, he to whom you gave authority
to rule over those who are with him.
9.8 And they went into the daughters of
men together, lay with those women,
became unclean, and revealed to them
these sins.
9.9 And the women bore giants, and
thereby the whole Earth has been filled
with blood and iniquity.
9.10 And now behold the souls which
have died cry out and complain unto the
Gate of Heaven, and their lament has
ascended, and they cannot go out in the
face of the iniquity which is being
committed on the earth.
9.11 And you know everything, before
it happens, and you know this, and what
concerns each of them. But you say
nothing to us. What ought we to do
with them, about this?"
10.1 And then the Most High, the
Great and Holy One, spoke and sent
Arsyalalyur to the son of Lamech, and
said to him:
10.2 "Say to him in my name; hide
yourself! And reveal to him the end,
which is coming, because the whole
earth will be destroyed. A deluge is
about to come on all the earth; and all
that is in it will be destroyed.
10.3 And now teach him so that he may
escape and his offspring may survive
3
for the whole Earth."
10.4 And further the Lord said to
Raphael: "Bind Azazel by his hands
and his feet and throw him into the
darkness. And split open the desert,
which is in Dudael, and throw him
there.
10.5 And throw on him jagged and
sharp stones and cover him with
darkness. And let him stay there
forever. And cover his face so that he
may not see the light.
10.6 And so that, on the Great Day of
Judgment, he may be hurled into the
fire.
10.7 And restore the Earth which the
Angels have ruined. And announce the
restoration of the Earth. For I shall
restore the Earth so that not all the sons
of men shall be destroyed because of the
knowledge which the Watchers made
known and taught to their sons.
10.8 And the whole Earth has been
ruined by the teaching of the works of
Azazel; and against him write: ALL
SIN."
10.9 And the Lord said to Gabriel:
“Proceed against the bastards, and the
reprobates, and against the sons of the
fornicators. And destroy the sons of the
fornicators, and the sons of the
Watchers, from amongst men. And
send them out, and send them against
one another, and let them destroy
themselves in battle; for they will not
have length of days.
10.10 And they will petition you, but
the petitioners will gain nothing in
respect of them, for they hope for
eternal life, and that each of them will
live life for five hundred years."
10.11 And the Lord said to Michael:
"Go, inform Semyaza, and the others
with him, who have associated with the
women to corrupt themselves with them
in all their uncleanness.
10.12 When all their sons kill each
other, and when they see the destruction
of their loved ones, bind them for
seventy generations, under the hills of
the earth, until the day of their judgment
and of their consummation, until the
judgment, which is for all eternity, is
accomplished.
10.13 And in those days, they will lead
them to the Abyss of Fire; in torment,
and in prison they will be shut up for all
eternity.
10.14 And then Semyaza will be burnt,
and from then on destroyed with them;
together they will be bound until the
end of all generations.
10.15 And destroy all the souls of lust,
and the sons of the Watchers, for they
have wronged men.
10.16 Destroy all wrong from the face
of the Earth and every evil work will
cease.
10.17 And now all the righteous will be
humble, and will live until they beget
thousands. And all the days of their
youth, and their sabbaths, they will
fulfill in peace.
10.18 And in those days the whole earth
will be tilled in righteousness and all of
it will be planted with trees; and it will
be filled with blessing.
10.19 And all the pleasant trees they
will plant on it and they will plant on it
vines. And the vine that is planted on it
will produce fruit in abundance; and
every seed that is sown on it, each
measure will produce a thousand, and
each measure of olives will produce ten
baths of oil.
10.20 And you cleanse the Earth from
all wrong, and from all iniquity, and
from all sin, and from all impiety, and
from all the uncleanness which is
brought about on the earth.
10.21 And all the sons of men shall be
righteous, and all the nations shall serve
and bless me and all shall worship me.
10.22 And the Earth will be cleansed
from all corruption, and from all sin,
and from all wrath, and from all
torment; and I will not again send a
flood upon it, for all generations,
forever.
4
11.1 And in those days, I will open
the Storehouses of Blessing, which are
in Heaven, so that I may send them
down upon the Earth, upon the work,
and upon the toil, of the sons of men.
11.2 Peace and truth will be united, for
all the days of eternity, and for all the
generations of eternity.
12.1 And then Enoch disappeared
and none of the sons of men knew
where he was hidden, where he was, or
what had happened.
12.2 And all his doings were with the
Holy Ones, and with the Watchers, in
his days.
12.3 And I Enoch, was blessing the
Great Lord and the King of Eternity.
And behold, the Watchers called to me -
Enoch the scribe - and said to me:
12.4 "Enoch, scribe of righteousness.
Go and inform the Watchers of Heaven,
who have left the High Heaven and the
Holy Eternal Place, and have corrupted
themselves with women, and have done
as the sons of men do and have taken
wives for themselves, and have become
completely corrupt on the earth.
12.5 They will have on Earth, neither
peace, nor forgiveness of sin, for they
will not rejoice in their sons.
12.6 The slaughter of their beloved ones
they will see; and over the destruction
of their sons they will lament and
petition forever. But they will have
neither mercy nor peace.”
13.1 And Enoch went and said to
Azazel: "You will not have peace. A
severe sentence has come out against
you that you should be bound.
13.2 And you will have neither rest nor
mercy, nor the granting of any petitions,
because of the wrong which you have
taught, and because of all the works of
blasphemy and wrong and sin which
you have shown to the sons of men."
13.3 And then I went and spoke to them
all together, and they were all afraid;
fear and trembling seized them.
13.4 And they asked me to write out for
them the record of a petition, so that
they might receive forgiveness, and to
take a record of their petition up to the
Lord in Heaven.
13.5 For they were not able, from then
on, to speak, and they did not raise their
eyes to Heaven, out of shame for the
sins, for which they had been
condemned.
13.6 And then I wrote out the record of
their petition, and their supplication in
regard to their spirits, and the deeds of
each one of them, and in regard to what
they asked; that they should obtain
absolution and forbearance.
13.7 And I went and sat down by the
waters of Dan, in Dan, which is
southwest of Hermon; and I read out the
record of their petition, until I fell
asleep.
13.8 And behold a dream came to me,
and visions fell upon me, and I saw a
vision of wrath; that I should speak to
the sons of Heaven and reprove them.
13.9 And I woke up and went to them,
and they were all sitting gathered
together as they mourned, in
Ubelseyael, which is between Lebanon
and Senir, with their faces covered.
13.10 And I spoke in front of them all;
the visions that I had seen in my sleep,
and I began to speak these words to
reprove the Watchers of Heaven.

14.1 This book is the word of
righteousness, and of reproof, for the
Watchers who are from Eternity; as the
Holy and Great One commanded in that
vision.
14.2 I saw in my sleep what I will now
tell, with the tongue of flesh, and with
my breath, which the Great One has
given men in the mouth, so that they
might speak with it, and understand
with the heart.
5
14.3 As He has created, and appointed,
men to understand the word of
knowledge, so He created and appointed
me to reprove the Watchers, the sons of
Heaven.
14.4 And I wrote out your petition, but
in my vision, thus it appeared, that your
petition would not be granted to you, for
all the days of eternity; and complete
judgment has been decreed against you,
and you will not have peace.
14.5 And from now on, you will not
ascend into Heaven, for all eternity, and
it has been decreed that you will be
bound on Earth for all the days of
eternity.
14.6 And before this, you will have seen
the destruction of your beloved sons,
and you will not be able to enjoy them,
but they will fall before you by the
sword.
14.7 And your petition will not be
granted in respect of them or in respect
of yourselves. And while you weep and
supplicate you do not speak a single
word from the writings which I have
written.
14.8 And the vision appeared to me, as
follows: - Behold; clouds called me in
the vision, and mist called me. And the
path of the stars, and flashes of
lightning, hastened me and drove me.
And in the vision winds caused me to
fly, and hastened me, and lifted me up
into the sky.
14.9 And I proceeded until I came near
a wall which was made of hailstones,
and a tongue of fire surrounded it, and it
began to make me afraid.
14.10 And I went into the tongue of fire
and came near to a large house, which
was built of hailstones, and the wall of
that house was like a mosaic of
hailstones and its floor was snow.
14.11 Its roof was like the path of the
stars and flashes of lightning, and
among them was fiery cherubim, and
their sky was like water.
14.12 And there was a fire burning
around its wall and its door was ablaze
with fire.
14.13 And I went into that house, and it
was as hot as fire and as cold as snow,
and there was neither pleasure nor life
in it. Fear covered me and trembling
took hold of me.
14.14 And as I was shaking and
trembling, I fell on my face.
14.15 And I saw in the vision, and
behold, another house which was larger
than the former and all its doors were
open before me, and it was built of a
tongue of fire.
14.16 And in everything, it so excelled
in glory and splendor and size, so that I
am unable to describe to you its glory
and its size.
14.17 And its floor was fire, and above
lightning and the path of the stars, and
its roof also was a burning fire.
14.18 And I looked, and I saw in it, a
high throne, and its appearance was like
ice, and its surrounds like the shining
Sun and the sound of cherubim.
14.19 And from underneath the high
throne there flowed out rivers of fire so
that it was impossible to look at it.
14.20 And He who is Great in Glory sat
upon it, and his raiment was brighter
than the Sun, and whiter than any snow.
14.21 And no Angel could enter, and at
the appearance of the face of Him who
is Honoured and Praised, no creature of
flesh could look.
14.22 A sea of fire burnt around Him,
and a great fire stood in front of Him,
and none of those around Him came
near to Him. Ten thousand times ten
thousand stood before Him but He
needed no Holy Council.
14.23 And the Holy Ones who were
near to Him did not leave by night or
day and did not depart from Him.
14.24 And until then I had a covering
on my face, as I trembled. And the
Lord called me with his own mouth, and
said to me: "Come here, Enoch, to my
Holy Word."
14.25 And He lifted me up and brought
me near to the door. And I looked, with
6
my face down.
15.1 And He answered me, and said
to me with His voice: "Hear! Do not be
afraid, Enoch, you righteous man, and
scribe of righteousness. Come here and
hear my voice.
15.2 And go say to the Watchers of
Heaven, who sent you to petition on
their behalf: You ought to petition on
behalf of men, not men on behalf of
you.
15.3 Why have you left the High, Holy
and Eternal Heaven, and lain with
women, and become unclean with the
daughters of men, and taken wives for
yourselves, and done as the sons of the
earth, and begotten giant sons?
15.4 And you were spiritual, Holy,
living an eternal life, but you became
unclean upon the women, and begot
children through the blood of flesh, and
lusted after the blood of men, and
produced flesh and blood, as they do,
who die and are destroyed.
15.5 And for this reason I give men
wives; so that they might sow seed in
them, and so that children might be born
by them, so that deeds might be done on
the Earth.
15.6 But you, formerly, were spiritual,
living an eternal, immortal life, for all
the generations of the world.
15.7 For this reason I did not arrange
wives for you; because the dwelling of
the spiritual ones is in Heaven.
15.8 And now, the giants who were
born from body and flesh will be called
Evil Spirits on the Earth, and on the
Earth will be their dwelling.
15.9 And evil spirits came out from
their flesh, because from above they
were created, from the Holy Watchers
was their origin and first foundation.
Evil spirits they will be on Earth and
‘Spirits of the Evil Ones’ they will be
called.
15.10 And the dwelling of the Spirits of
Heaven is Heaven, but the dwelling of
the spirits of the Earth, who were born
on the Earth, is Earth.
15.11 And the spirits of the giants do
wrong, are corrupt, attack, fight, break
on the Earth, and cause sorrow. And
they eat no food, do not thirst, and are
not observed.
15.12 And these spirits will rise against
the sons of men, and against the
women, because they came out of them
during the days of slaughter and
destruction.
16.1 And the death of the giants,
wherever the spirits have gone out from
their bodies, their flesh will be
destroyed, before the Judgment. Thus
they will be destroyed until the Day of
the Great Consummation is
accomplished, upon the Great Age,
upon the Watchers and the impious
ones."
16.2 And now to the Watchers, who
sent you to petition on their behalf, who
were formerly in Heaven:
16.3 "You were in Heaven but its
secrets had not yet been revealed to you;
and a worthless mystery you knew.
This you made known to women, in the
hardness of your hearts. And through
this mystery the women and the men
cause evil to increase on the Earth."
16.4 Say to them therefore: "You will
not have peace."
17.1 And they took me to a place
where they were like burning fire, and,
when they wished, they made
themselves look like men.
17.2 And they led me to a place of
storm, and to a mountain, the tip of
whose summit reached to Heaven.
17.3 And I saw lighted places, and
thunder in the outermost ends, in its
depths a bow of fire, and arrows and
their quivers, and a sword of fire, and
all the flashes of lightning.
17.4 And they took me to the Water of
Life, as it is called, and to the Fire of the
7
West, which receives every setting of
the Sun.
17.5 And I came to a river of fire,
whose fire flows like water, and pours
out into the Great Sea, which is towards
the west.
17.6 And I saw all the great rivers, and I
reached the Great Darkness, and went
where all flesh walks.
17.7 And I saw the Mountains of the
Darkness of Winter and the place where
the water of all the deeps pours out.
17.8 And I saw the mouths of all the
rivers of the Earth, and the mouth of the
deep.
18.1 And I saw the storehouses of all
the winds, and I saw how with them He
has adorned all creation, and I saw the
foundations of the Earth.
18.2 And I saw the cornerstone of the
Earth. And I saw the four winds which
support the Earth and the sky.
18.3 And I saw how the winds stretch
out the height of Heaven, and how they
position themselves between Heaven
and Earth; they are the Pillars of
Heaven.
18.4 And I saw the winds which turn
the sky and cause the disc of the Sun
and all the stars to set.
18.5 And I saw the winds on the Earth
which support the clouds and I saw the
paths of the Angels. I saw at the end of
the Earth; the firmament of Heaven
above.
18.6 And I went towards the south, and
it was burning day and night, where
there were seven mountains of precious
stones, three towards the east and three
towards the south.
18.7 And those towards the east were of
coloured stone, and one was of pearl,
and one of healing stone; and those
towards the south, of red stone.
18.8 And the middle one reached to
Heaven, like the throne of the Lord, of
stibium, and the top of the throne was of
sapphire.
18.9 And I saw a burning fire, and what
was in all the mountains.
18.10 And I saw a place there, beyond
the great earth; there the waters
gathered together.
18.11 And I saw a deep chasm of the
earth, with pillars of heavenly fire, and I
saw among them fiery pillars of
Heaven, which were falling, and as
regards both height and depth, they
were immeasurable.
18.12 And beyond this chasm, I saw a
place, and it had neither the sky above
it, nor the foundation of earth below it;
there was no water on it, and no birds,
but it was a desert place.
18.13 And a terrible thing I saw there,
seven stars, like great burning
mountains.
18.14 And like a spirit questioning me,
the Angel said: “This is the place of the
end of Heaven and Earth; this is the
prison for the Stars of Heaven and the
Host of Heaven.
18.15 And the stars which roll over the
fire, these are the ones which
transgressed the command of the Lord,
from the beginning of their rising,
because they did not come out at their
proper times.
18.16 And He was angry with them, and
bound them until the time of the
consummation of their sin, in the Year
of Mystery.”
19.1 And Uriel said to me: “The
spirits of the Angels who were
promiscuous with women will stand
here; and they, assuming many forms,
made men unclean and will lead men
astray so that they sacrifice to demons
as gods. And they will stand there until
the great judgment day, on which they
will be judged, so that an end will be
made of them.
19.2 And their wives, having led astray
the Angels of Heaven, will become
peaceful.”
19.3 And I, Enoch, alone saw the sight,
the ends of everything; and no man has
seen what I have seen.
8
20.1 And these are the names of the
Holy Angels who keep watch.
20.2 Uriel, one of the Holy Angels;
namely the Holy Angel of the Spirits of
Men.
20.4 Raguel, one of the Holy Angels;
who takes vengeance on the world, and
on the lights.
20.5 Michael, one of the Holy Angels,
namely the one put in charge of the best
part of humankind, in charge of the
nation.
20.6 Saraqael, one of the Holy Angels;
who is in charge of the spirits of men
who cause the spirits to sin.
20.7 Gabriel, one of the Holy Angels,
who is in charge of the Serpents, and the
Garden, and the Cherubim.
21.1 And I went round to a place
where nothing was made.
21.2 And I saw a terrible thing, neither
the High Heaven nor the firm ground,
but a desert place, prepared and terrible.
21.3 And there, I saw seven Stars of
Heaven, bound on it together, like great
mountains, and burning like fire.
21.4 Then I said: “For what sin have
they been bound, and why have they
been thrown here?”
21.5 And Uriel, one of the Holy Angels,
who was with me and led me, spoke to
me and said: "Enoch, about whom do
you ask? About whom do you inquire,
ask, and care?
21.6 These are some of the stars which
transgressed the command of the Lord
Most High, and they have been bound
here until ten thousand ages are
completed; the number of days of their
sin."
21.7 And from there I went to another
place, more terrible than this. And I
saw a terrible thing: there was a great
fire there, which burnt and blazed. And
the place had a cleft reaching into the
abyss, full of great pillars of fire, which
were made to fall; neither its extent nor
its size could I see, nor could I see its
source.
21.8 Then I said: "How terrible this
place is, and how painful to look at!"
21.9 Then Uriel, one of the Holy
Angels, who was with me, answered
me. He answered me and said to me:
"Enoch, why do you have such fear and
terror because of this terrible place, and
before this pain?"
21.10 And he said to me: "This place is
the prison of the Angels, and there they
will be held for ever."
22.1 And from there, I went to
another place, and he showed me in the
west a large and high mountain, and a
hard rock, and four beautiful places.
22.2 And inside, it was deep, wide, and
very smooth. How smooth is that which
rolls, and deep and dark to look at!
22.3 Then Raphael, one of the Holy
Angels who was with me, answered me,
and said to me: "These beautiful places
are there so that the spirits, the souls of
the dead, might be gathered into them.
For them they were created; so that here
they might gather the souls of the sons
of men.
22.4 And these places they made, where
they will keep them until the Day of
Judgment, and until their appointed
time, and that appointed time will be
long, until the great judgment comes
upon them.
22.5 And I saw the spirits of the sons of
men who were dead and their voices
reached Heaven and complained.
22.6 Then I asked Raphael, the Angel
who was with me, and said to him:
"Whose is this spirit, whose voice thus
reaches Heaven and complains?"
22.7 And he answered me, and said to
me, saying: "This spirit is the one that
came out of Abel, whom Cain, his
brother, killed. And he will complain
about him until his offspring are
destroyed from the face of the Earth,
and from amongst the offspring of men,
9
his offspring perish."
22.8 Then I asked about him, and about
judgment on all, and I said: "Why is
one separated from another?"
22.9 And he answered me, and said to
me: "These three places where made, in
order that they might separate the spirits
of the dead. And thus the souls of the
righteous have been separated; this is
the spring of water, and on it the light.
22.10 Likewise, a place has been
created for sinners, when they die, and
are buried in the earth, and judgment
has not come upon them during their
life.
22.11 And here their souls will be
separated for this great torment, until
the Great Day of Judgment and
Punishment and Torment for those who
curse, forever, and of vengeance on
their souls. And there he will bind them
forever. Verily, He is, from the
beginning of the world.
22.12 And thus a place has been
separated for the souls of those who
complain, and give information about
their destruction, about when they were
killed, in the days of the sinners.
22.13 Thus a place has been created, for
the souls of men who are not righteous,
but sinners, accomplished in
wrongdoing, and with the wrongdoers
will be their lot. But their souls will not
be killed on the day of judgment, nor
will they rise from here."
22.14 Then I blessed the Lord of Glory,
and said: "Blessed be my Lord, the
Lord of Glory and Righteousness, who
rules everything forever."
23.1 And from there I went to
another place, towards the west, to the
ends of the Earth.
23.2 And I saw a fire that burnt and ran,
without resting or ceasing from running,
by day or by night, but continued in
exactly the same way.
23.3 And I asked saying: "What is this
which has no rest?"
23.4 Then Raguel, one of the Holy
Angels, who was with me, answered
me, and said to me: “This burning fire,
whose course you saw towards the west,
is the fire of all the Lights of Heaven.”
24.1 And from there I went to
another place of the Earth and he
showed me a mountain of fire that
blazed day and night.
24.2 And I went towards it and saw
seven magnificent mountains. And all
were different from one another, and
precious and beautiful stones, and all
were precious, and their appearance
glorious, and their form was beautiful.
Three towards the east one fixed firmly
on another and three towards the south
one on another, and deep and rugged
valleys, no one of which was near
another.
24.3 And there was a seventh mountain,
in the middle of these, and in their
height they were all like the seat of a
throne and fragrant trees surrounded it.
24.4 And there was among them a tree
such as which I have never smelt, and
none of them, or any others, were like it.
It smells more fragrant than any
fragrance, and its leaves, and its
flowers, and its wood never wither. Its
fruit is good, and its fruit is like bunches
of dates on a palm.
24.5 And then I said: "Behold, this
beautiful tree! Beautiful to look at, and
pleasant are its leaves, and its fruit very
delightful in appearance."
24.6 And then Michael, one of the Holy
and Honoured Angels, who was with
me, and was in charge of them,
25.1 answered me and said to me:
“Enoch, why do you ask me about the
fragrance of this tree, and why do you
inquire to learn?”
25.2 Then I, Enoch, answered him
saying: “I wish to learn about
everything, but especially about this
10
tree.”
25.3 And he answered me, saying:
“This high mountain, which you saw,
whose summit is like the Throne of the
Lord, is the throne where the Holy and
Great One, the Lord of Glory, the
Eternal King, will sit, when he comes
down to visit the Earth for good.
25.4 And this beautiful and fragrant
tree, and no creature of flesh has
authority to touch it until the great
judgment, when he will take vengeance
on all and bring everything to a
consummation forever, this will be
given to the righteous and the humble.
25.5 From its fruit, life will be given to
the chosen; towards the north it will be
planted, in a Holy place, by the house of
the Lord, the Eternal King.
25.6 Then they will rejoice with joy and
be glad in the Holy place. They will
each draw the fragrance of it into their
bones, and they will live a long life on
earth, as your fathers lived. And in their
days sorrow and pain, and toil and
punishment, will not touch them.”
25.7 Then I blessed the Lord of Glory,
the Eternal King, because he has
prepared such things for righteous men,
and has created such things, and said
that they are to be given to them.
26.1 And from there, I went to the
middle of the earth, and saw a blessed,
well watered place, which had branches
which remained alive, and sprouted
from a tree which had been cut down.
26.2 And there I saw a holy mountain,
and under the mountain, to the east of it,
there was water, and it flowed towards
the south.
26.3 And I saw towards the east,
another mountain, which was of the
same height, and between them, there
was a deep and narrow valley; and in it,
a stream ran by the mountain.
26.4 And to the west of this one, was
another mountain, which was lower
than it was and not high; and under it,
there was a valley between them. And
there were other deep and dry valleys at
the end of the three mountains.
26.5 And all the valleys were deep and
narrow, of hard rock, and trees were
planted on them.
26.6 And I was amazed at the rock, and
I was amazed at the valley; I was very
much amazed.
27.1 Then I said: "What is the
purpose of this blessed land, which is
completely full of trees, and of this
accursed valley in the middle of them?"
27.2 Then Raphael, one of the Holy
Angels who was with me, answered me,
and said to me: "This accursed valley,
is for those who are cursed for ever.
Here will be gathered together all who
speak with their mouths against the
Lord - words that are not fitting, and say
hard things about His Glory. Here they
will gather them together, and here will
be their place of judgment.
27.3 And in the last days there will be
the spectacle of the righteous judgment
upon them, in front of the righteous,
forever. For here, the merciful will
bless the Lord of Glory the Eternal
King.
27.4 And in the days of the judgment on
them they will bless Him, on account of
his mercy, according as He has assigned
to them their lot."
27.5 Then I myself blessed the Lord of
Glory, I addressed Him, and I
remembered His majesty, as was fitting.
28.1 And from there, I went towards
the east, to the middle of the mountain
of the wilderness, and I saw only desert.
28.2 But it was full of trees from this
seed and water gushed out over it from
above.
28.3 The torrent, which flowed towards
the northwest, seemed copious, and
from all sides, there went up spray and
mist.
29.1 And I went to another place,
11
away from the wilderness; I came near
to the east of this mountain.
29.2 And there I saw Trees of
Judgment, especially vessels of the
fragrance of incense and myrrh, and the
trees were not alike.
30.1 And above it, above these,
above the mountains of the east, and not
far away, I saw another place, valleys of
water, like that which does not fail.
30.2 And I saw a beautiful tree, and its
fragrance was like that of the mastic.
30.3 And by the banks of these valleys I
saw fragrant cinnamon. And beyond
those valleys I came towards the east.
31.1 And I saw another mountain on
which there were trees, and there flowed
out water, and there flowed out from it,
as it were, a nectar whose name is
styrax and galbanum.
31.2 And beyond this mountain I saw
another mountain, and on it there were
aloe trees, and those trees were full of a
fruit, which is like an almond, and is
hard.
31.3 And when they take this fruit it is
better than any fragrance.
32.1 And after these fragrances, to
the north, as I looked over the
mountains, I saw seven mountains full
of fine nard, and fragrant trees of
cinnamon and pepper.
32.2 And from there, I went over the
summits of those mountains, far away
to the east, and I went over the Red Sea,
and I was far from it, and I went over
the Angel Zotiel.
32.3 And I came to the Garden of
Righteousness, and I saw beyond those
trees many large trees growing there,
sweet smelling, large, very beautiful and
glorious, the Trees of Wisdom, from
which they eat and know great wisdom.
32.4 And it is like the carob tree, and its
fruit is like bunches of grapes on a vine,
very beautiful, and the smell of this tree
spreads and penetrates afar.
32.5 And I said: "This tree is beautiful!
How beautiful and pleasing is its
appearance!"
32.6 And the Holy Angel Raphael, who
was with me, answered me and said to
me: "This is the Tree of Wisdom, from
which your ancient father and ancient
mother, who were before you, ate and
learnt wisdom; and their eyes were
opened, and they knew that they were
naked. And they were driven from the
garden."
33.1 And from there I went to the
ends of the earth, and I saw there large
animals, each different from the other,
and also birds, which differed in form,
beauty, and call - each different from
the other.
33.2 And to the east of these animals, I
saw the ends of the Earth, on which
Heaven rests, and the open Gates of
Heaven.
33.3 And I saw how the stars of Heaven
come out, and counted the Gates out of
which they come, and wrote down all
their outlets, for each one, individually,
according to their number. And their
names, according to their constellations,
their positions, their times, and their
months, as the Angel Uriel, who was
with me, showed me.
33.4 And he showed me everything, and
wrote it down, and also their names he
wrote down for me, and their laws and
their functions.
34.1 And from there I went towards
the north, to the ends of the Earth, and
there I saw a great and glorious wonder
at the ends of the whole Earth.
34.2 And there I saw three Gates of
Heaven; through each of them north
winds go out; when they blow there is
cold, hail, hoarfrost, snow, fog, and
rain.
34.3 And from one Gate, it blows for
good; but when they blow through the
12
other two Gates, it is with force, and it
brings torment over the earth, and they
blow with force.
35.1 And from there I went towards
the west, to the ends of the Earth, and I
saw there, as I saw in the east, three
open Gates - as many Gates and as
many outlets.
36.1 And from there I went towards
the south, to the ends of the Earth, and
there I saw three Gates of Heaven open;
and the south wind, the mist, and the
rain, and wind, come out from there.
36.2 And from there I went towards the
east of the ends of Heaven, and there I
saw the three eastern Gates of Heaven
open, and above them, there were
smaller Gates.
36.3 Through each of these smaller
Gates, the stars of Heaven pass, and go
towards the west, on the path that has
been shown to them.
36.4 And when I saw, I blessed, and I
will always bless the Lord of Glory,
who has made Great and Glorious
Wonders so that he might show the
greatness of His Work, to His Angels,
and to the souls of men, so that they
might praise His Work. And so that all
his creatures might see the work of His
Power, and praise the great work of His
Hands, and bless Him forever!
Section II. Chapters XXXVIILXXI
The Parables
37.1 The second vision that he saw,
the vision of wisdom, which Enoch, the
son of Jared, the son of Malalel, the son
of Cainan, the son of Enosh, the son of
Seth, the son of Adam, saw.
37.2 And this is the beginning of the
words of wisdom, which I raised my
voice to speak, and say. “To those who
dwell on dry ground: - Hear, you men
of old, and see, those who come after;
the words of the Holy One, which I will
speak, in front of the Lord of Spirits.”
37.3 “It would have been better to have
said these things before, but from those
who come after, we will not withhold
the beginning of wisdom.”
37.4 Until now, there has not been
given, by the Lord of Spirits, such
wisdom as I have received. In
accordance with my insight, in
accordance with the wish of the Lord of
Spirits: by whom the lot of eternal life
has been given to me.
37.5 And the three parables were
imparted to me and I raised my voice,
and said to those who dwell on the dry
ground: -
38.1 The First Parable.
When the community of the righteous
appears and the sinners are judged for
their sins and are driven from the face
of the dry ground.
38.2 And when the Righteous One
appears, in front of the chosen
righteous, whose works are weighed by
the Lord of Spirits. And when light
appears to the righteous and chosen who
dwell on the dry ground. Where will be
the dwelling of the sinners? And where
will be the resting-place of those who
denied the Lord of Spirits? It would
have been better for them, if they had
not been born.
38.3 And when the secrets of the
righteous are revealed, the sinners will
be judged, and the impious driven from
the presence of the righteous and the
chosen.
38.4 And from then on, those who
possess the earth will not be mighty and
exalted. Nor will they be able to look at
the face of the Holy ones, for the light
of the Lord of the Spirits will have
appeared on the face of the Holy, the
righteous, and the chosen.
13
38.5 And the mighty kings will at that
time be destroyed and given into the
hand of the righteous and the Holy.
38.6 And from then on no one will be
able to seek the Lord of Spirits for their
life will be at an end.
39.1 And it will come to pass in
these days that the chosen and holy
children will come down from the high
Heavens and their offspring will
become one with the sons of men.
39.2 In those days Enoch received
books of indignation and anger and
books of tumult and confusion. And
there will be no mercy for them, says
the Lord of Spirits.
39.3 And at that time clouds and a
storm wind carried me off from the face
of the earth and set me down at the end
of Heaven.
39.4 And there I saw another vision; the
Dwelling of the Righteous and the
Resting-Places of the Holy.
39.5 There my eyes saw their dwelling
with the Angels, and their resting places
with the Holy Ones, and they were
petitioning and supplicating and
praying, on behalf of the sons of men;
and righteousness, like water, flowed in
front of them, and mercy like dew on
the ground. Thus it is among them
forever and ever.
39.6 And in those days my eyes saw the
Place of the Chosen Ones of
Righteousness and Faith; and there will
be righteousness in their days, and the
righteous and chosen will be without
number, in front of him, forever and
ever.
39.7 And I saw their dwelling, under the
Wings of the Lord of Spirits, and all the
righteous and chosen shone in front of
him, like the light of fire. And their
mouths were full of blessing, and their
lips praised the name of the Lord of
Spirits. And righteousness will not fail
in front of him, and truth will not fail in
front of him.
39.8 There I wished to dwell, and my
soul longed for that dwelling; there had
my lot been assigned before, for thus it
was decided about me, in front of the
Lord of Spirits.
39.9 And in those days I praised and
exalted the name of the Lord of Spirits,
with blessing and praise, for he has
destined me for blessing and praise, in
accordance with the Lord of Spirits.
39.10 And for a long time my eyes
looked at that place, and I blessed him
and praised him, saying: "Blessed is
He, and may He be blessed from the
beginning and for ever!"
39.11 And in his presence there is no
end. He knew before the world was
created what the world would be, even
for all the generations that are to come.
39.12 Those who do not sleep bless
you, and they stand before Your Glory,
and bless and praise and exalt, saying:
"Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord of Spirits; he
fills the earth with spirits."
39.13 And there, my eyes saw all those
who do not sleep; standing in front of
Him, and blessing, and saying:
"Blessed are you, and blessed is the
name of the Lord, for ever and ever!"
39.14 And my face was transformed
until I was unable to see.
40.1 And after this I saw a thousand
thousands and ten thousand times ten
thousand! A multitude beyond number,
or reckoning, who stood in front of the
Glory of the Lord of Spirits.
40.2 I looked, and on the four sides of
the Lord of Spirits, I saw four figures,
different from those who were standing;
and I learnt their names, because the
Angel who went with me made known
their names, and showed me all the
secret things.
40.3 And I heard the voices of those
four figures as they sang praises in front
of the Lord of Glory.
40.4 The first voice blesses the Lord of
Spirits forever and ever.
40.5 And the second voice I heard
blessing the Chosen One and the chosen
14
who depend on the Lord of Spirits.
40.6 And the third voice I heard,
petitioned, and prayed, on behalf of
those who dwell on dry ground and
supplicate in the name of the Lord of
Spirits.
40.7 And the fourth voice I heard
driving away the Satans and not
allowing them to come in front of the
Lord of Spirits to accuse those who
dwell on the high ground.
40.8 And after this I asked the Angel of
Peace, who went with me, and showed
me everything which is secret: "Who
are those four figures, whom I have
seen, and whose words I have heard and
written down?"
40.9 And he said to me: "This first one,
is the Holy Michael, the merciful and
long-suffering. And the second, who is
in charge of all the diseases, and in
charge of all the wounds of the sons of
men, is Raphael. And the third, who is
in charge of all the powers, is the Holy
Gabriel. And the fourth, who is in
charge of repentance and hope of those
who will inherit eternal life, is
Phanuel.”
40.10 And these are the four Angels of
the Lord Most High; and the four voices
that I heard in those days.
41.1 And after this, I saw all the
secrets of Heaven, and how the
Kingdom is divided, and how the deeds
of men are weighed in the Balance.
41.2 There I saw the Dwelling of the
Chosen, and the Resting Places of the
Holy; and my eyes saw there all the
sinners who deny the name of the Lord
of Spirits being driven from there. And
they dragged them off, and they were
not able to remain, because of the
punishment that went out from the Lord
of Spirits.
41.3 And there my eyes saw the secrets
of the flashes of lightning and of the
thunder. And the secrets of the winds,
how they are distributed in order to
blow over the earth, and the secrets of
the clouds, and of the dew; and there I
saw from where they go out, in that
place. And how, from there, the dust of
the earth is saturated.
41.4 And there I saw closed storehouses
from which the winds are distributed,
and the storehouse of the hail, and the
storehouse of the mist, and the
storehouse of the clouds; and its cloud
remained over the earth, from the
beginning of the world.
41.5 And I saw the Chambers of the
Sun and the Moon, where they go out,
and where they return. And their
glorious return; and how one is more
honoured than the other is. And their
magnificent course, and how they do
not leave their course, neither adding
nor subtracting from their course. And
how they keep faith in one another,
observing their oath.
41.6 And the Sun goes out first, and
completes its journey at the command
of the Lord of Spirits - and his Name
endures forever and ever.
41.7 And after this is the hidden, and
visible, path of the Moon, and it travels
the course of its journey, in that place,
by day and by night. One stands
opposite the other, in front of the Lord
of Spirits, and they give thanks, and
sing praise, and do not rest, because
their thanksgiving is like rest to them.
41.8 For the shining Sun makes many
revolutions; for a blessing and for a
curse. And the path of the journey of
the Moon is for the righteous light but
for the sinners; darkness. In the Name
of the Lord, who has created a division
between light and darkness, and has
divided the spirits of men, and has
established the spirits of the righteous,
in the name of His Righteousness.
41.9 For no Angel hinders, and no
power is able to hinder, because the
judge sees them all, and judges them all
Himself.
42.1 Wisdom found no place where
she could dwell, and her dwelling was
15
in Heaven.
42.2 Wisdom went out, in order to
dwell among the sons of men, but did
not find a dwelling; wisdom returned to
her place, and took her seat in the midst
of the Angels.
42.3 And iniquity came out from her
chambers; those whom she did not seek
she found, and dwelt among them, like
rain in the desert, and like dew on the
parched ground.
43.1 And again I saw flashes of
lightning and the stars of Heaven, and I
saw how He called them all by their
names, and they obeyed Him.
43.2 And I saw the Balance of
Righteousness, how they are weighed
according to their light, according to the
width of their areas, and the day of their
appearing. And how their revolutions
produce lightning, and I saw their
revolutions, according to the number of
the Angels, and how they keep faith
with one another.
43.3 And I asked the Angel, who went
with me and showed me what is secret:
"What are these?"
43.4 And he said to me: "Their
likeness, the Lord of Spirits has shown
to you; these are the names of the
righteous who, dwell on the dry ground
and believe in the name of the Lord of
Spirits for ever and ever."
44.1 And other things I saw
concerning lightning, how some of the
stars rise and become lightning but
cannot lose their form.
45.1 And this is The Second
Parable. About those who deny the
Name of the Dwelling of the Holy Ones
and of the Lord of Spirits.
45.2 They will not ascend into Heaven
nor will they come upon the earth; such
will be the lot of the sinners who deny
the Name of the Lord of Spirits who
will thus be kept for the Day of
Affliction and Distress.
45.3 “On that day the Chosen One will
sit on the Throne of Glory and will
choose their works. And their resting
places will be without number and their
spirits within them will grow strong
when they see My Chosen One and
those who appeal to My Holy and
Glorious Name.
45.4 And on that day I will cause My
Chosen One to dwell among them and I
will transform Heaven and make it an
Eternal Blessing and Light.
45.5 And I will transform the dry
ground and make it a blessing, and I
will cause My Chosen Ones to dwell
upon it; but those who commit sin and
evil will not tread upon it.
45.6 For I have seen, and have satisfied
with peace, My Righteous Ones, and
have placed them in front of Me; but for
the sinners My Judgement draws near
so that I may destroy them from the face
of the earth.”
46.1 And there I saw one who had a
‘Head of Days’ and his head was white
like wool. And with him there was
another whose face had the appearance
of a man and his face was full of grace
like one of the Holy Angels.
46.2 And I asked one of the Holy
Angels, who went with me and showed
me all the secrets, about that Son of
Man, who he was, and from where he
was, and why he went with the Head of
Days.
46.3 And he answered me, and said to
me:
"This is the Son of Man who has
righteousness and with whom
righteousness dwells. He will reveal all
the treasures of that which is secret, for
the Lord of Spirits has chosen him, and
through uprightness his lot has
surpassed all others, in front of the Lord
of Spirits, forever.
46.4 And this Son of Man, who you
have seen, will rouse the kings and the
16
powerful from their resting places, and
the strong from their thrones, and will
loose the reins of the strong, and will
break the teeth of the sinners.
46.5 And he will cast down the kings
from their thrones, and from their
kingdoms, for they do not exalt him,
and do not praise him, and do not
humbly acknowledge from where their
kingdom was given to them.
46.6 And he will cast down the faces of
the strong and shame will fill them, and
darkness will be their dwelling, and
worms will be their resting place. And
they will have no hope of rising from
their resting-places, for they do not exalt
the name of the Lord of Spirits.
46.7 And these are they who judge the
Stars of Heaven, and raise their hands
against the Most High, and trample
upon the dry ground, and dwell upon it.
And all their deeds show iniquity, and
their power rests on their riches, and
their faith is in their gods that they have
made with their hands, and they deny
the name of the Lord of Spirits.
46.8 And they will be driven from the
houses of his congregation, and of the
faithful, who depend on the Name of the
Lord of Spirits.
47.1 And in those days, the prayer of
the righteous, and the blood of the
righteous will have ascended from the
Earth in front of the Lord of Spirits.
47.2 In these days the Holy Ones who
live in Heaven above will unite with one
voice, and supplicate, and pray, and
praise, and give thanks, and bless, in the
name of the Lord of Spirits. Because of
the blood of the righteous that has been
poured out. And because of the prayer
of the righteous, so that it may not cease
in front of the Lord of Spirits, so that
justice might be done to them, and that
their patience may not have to last
forever."
47.3 And in those days, I saw the Head
of Days sit down on the Throne of his
Glory and the Books of the Living were
opened in front of him and all His Host,
which dwell in the Heavens above, and
his Council were standing in front of
Him.
47.4 And the hearts of the Holy Ones
were full of joy that the number of
righteousness had been reached, and the
prayer of the righteous had been heard,
and the blood of the righteous had not
been required in front of the Lord of
Spirits.
48.1 And in that place I saw an
inexhaustible spring of righteousness
and many springs of wisdom
surrounded it, and all the thirsty drank
from them and were filled with wisdom,
and their dwelling was with the
Righteous and the Holy and the Chosen.
48.2 And at that hour that Son of Man
was named, in the presence of the Lord
of Spirits, and his name brought to the
Head of Days.
48.3 Even before the Sun and the
constellations were created, before the
Stars of Heaven were made, his name
was named in front of the Lord of
Spirits.
48.4 He will be a staff to the righteous
and the Holy, so that they may lean on
him and not fall, and he will be the
Light of the Nations, and he will be the
hope of those who grieve in their hearts.
48.5 All those who dwell upon the dry
ground will fall down and worship in
front of him, and they will bless, and
praise, and celebrate with psalms, the
name of the Lord of Spirits.
48.6 And because of this he was chosen,
and hidden in front of Him, before the
World was created, and forever.
48.7 But the wisdom of the Lord of
Spirits has revealed him to the Holy and
the righteous, for he has kept safe the lot
of the righteous, for they have hated and
rejected this world of iniquity. And all
its works and its ways they have hated
in the name of the Lord of Spirits. For
in His name they are saved and he is the
one who will require their lives.
17
48.8 And in those days the kings of the
Earth, and the strong who possess the
dry ground, will have downcast faces
because of the works of their hands, for
on the day of their distress and trouble
they will not save themselves.
48.9 And I will give them into the hands
of my chosen ones; like straw in the
fire, and like lead in water, so they will
burn in front of the righteous, and sink
in front of the Holy, and no trace will be
found of them.
48.10 And on the day of their trouble
there will be rest on the earth and they
will fall down in front of him and will
not rise. And there will be no one who
will take them with his hands and raise
them for they denied the Lord of Spirits
and his Messiah. May the name of the
Lord of Spirits be blessed!
49.1 For wisdom has been poured
out like water and glory will not fail in
front of Him forever and ever.
49.2 For He is powerful in all the
secrets of righteousness and iniquity
will pass away like a shadow, and will
have no existence; for the Chosen One
stands in front of the Lord of Spirits and
His Glory is for ever and ever, and His
Power for all generations.
49.3 And in Him dwell the spirit of
wisdom, and the spirit that gives
understanding, and the spirit of
knowledge and of power, and the spirit
of those who sleep in righteousness.
49.4 And he will judge the things that
are secret, and no one will be able to say
an idle word in front of him, for he has
been chosen in front of the Lord of
Spirits, in accordance with His wish.
50.1 And in those days a change will
occur for the Holy and the chosen; the
Light of Days will rest upon them, and
glory and honour will return to the
Holy.
50.2 And on the day of trouble,
calamity will be heaped up over the
sinners, but the righteous will conquer
in the Name of the Lord of Spirits and
He will show this to others so that they
might repent and abandon the works of
their hands.
50.3 And they will have no honour in
front of the Lord of Spirits, but in His
Name they will be saved and the Lord
of Spirits will have mercy on them, for
his mercy is great.
50.4 And He is righteous in His
judgment, and in front of His Glory
iniquity will not be able to stand against
His Judgment; he who does not repent
will be destroyed.
50.5 "And from then on I will not have
mercy on them," says the Lord of
Spirits.
51.1 And in those days the Earth will
return that which has been entrusted to
it, and Sheol will return that which has
been entrusted to it and that which it has
received. And destruction will return
what it owes.
51.2 And He will choose the Righteous
and the Holy from among them; for the
day has come near when they must be
saved.
51.3 And in those days, the Chosen One
will sit on his throne, and all the Secrets
of Wisdom will flow out from the
council of his mouth, for the Lord of
Spirits has appointed him and glorified
him.
51.4 And in those days the mountains
will leap like rams, and the hills will
skip like lambs satisfied with milk, and
all will become Angels in Heaven.
51.5 Their faces will shine with joy, for
in those days the Chosen One will have
risen and the earth will rejoice. And the
righteous will dwell upon it and the
chosen will walk upon it.
52.1 And after those days, in that
place where I had seen all the visions of
that which is secret, for I had been
carried off by a whirlwind, and they had
18
brought me to the west.
52.2 There my eyes saw the secrets of
Heaven; everything that will occur on
Earth: a mountain of iron, and a
mountain of copper, and a mountain of
silver, and a mountain of gold, and a
mountain of soft metal, and a mountain
of lead.
52.3 And I asked the Angel who went
with me, saying:
"What are these things which I have
seen in secret?"
52.4 And he said to me: "All these
things which you have seen serve the
authority of His Messiah, so that he may
be strong and powerful on the Earth."
52.5 And that Angel of Peace answered
me, saying: "Wait a little and you will
see, and everything which is secret,
which the Lord of Spirits has
established, will be revealed to you.
52.6 And these mountains, that you
have seen; the mountain of iron, and the
mountain of copper, and the mountain
of silver, and the mountain of gold, and
the mountain of soft metal, and the
mountain of lead. All these in front of
the Chosen One will be like wax before
fire, and like the water that comes down
from above onto these mountains they
will be weak under his feet.
52.7 And it will come to pass in those
days, that neither by gold, nor by silver,
will men save themselves; they will be
unable to save themselves, or to flee.
52.8 And there will be neither iron for
war nor material for a breastplate;
bronze will be no use, and tin will be of
no use and will count for nothing, and
lead will not be wanted.
52.9 All these will be wiped out and
destroyed from the face of the earth
when the Chosen One appears in front
of the Lord of Spirits."
53.1 And there my eyes saw a deep
valley, and its mouth was open; and all
those who dwell upon dry ground and
the sea and the islands will bring gifts
and presents and offerings to him, but
that deep valley will not become full.
53.2 And their hands commit evil, and
everything at which the righteous toil
the sinners evilly devour; and so the
sinners will be destroyed from in front
of the Lord of Spirits, and will be
banished from the face of His Earth,
unceasingly for ever and ever.
53.3 For I saw the Angels of
Punishment going and preparing all the
instruments of Satan.
53.4 And I asked the Angel of Peace,
who went with me, and I said to him:
"These instruments - for whom are they
preparing them?"
53.5 And he said to me: "They are
preparing these for the kings and the
powerful of this Earth, so that by means
of them they may be destroyed.
53.6 And after this the Righteous and
Chosen One will cause the house of his
congregation to appear; from then on, in
the name of the Lord of Spirits, they
will not be hindered.
53.7 And in front of him these
mountains will not be firm like the
earth, and the hills will be like a spring
of water; and the righteous will have
rest from the ill-treatment of the
sinners."
54.1 And I looked, and turned to
another part of the Earth, and I saw
there a deep valley with burning fire.
54.2 And they brought the kings and
powerful and threw them into that
valley.
54.3 And there my eyes saw how they
made instruments for them - iron chains
of immeasurable weight.
54.4 And I asked the Angel of Peace,
who went with me, saying: "These
chain instruments - for whom are they
being prepared?"
54.5 And he said to me: "These are
being prepared for the hosts of Azazel,
so that they may take them, and throw
them into the lowest part of hell; and
they will cover their jaws with rough
stones, as the Lord of Spirits
19
commanded.
54.6 And Michael and Gabriel, Raphael
and Phanuel - these will take hold of
them on that great day. And throw
them, on that day, into the furnace of
burning fire, so that the Lord of Spirits
may take vengeance on them for their
iniquity, in that they became servants of
Satan, and led astray those who dwell
upon the dry ground.
54.7 And in those days, the punishment
of the Lord of Spirits will go out, and all
the storehouses of the waters which are
above the sky and under the earth, will
be opened.
54.8 And all the waters will be joined
with the waters that are above the sky.
The water that is above the sky is male
and the water that is under the Earth is
female.
54.9 And all those who dwell upon the
dry ground, and those who dwell under
the ends of Heaven, will be wiped out.
54.10 And because of this they will
acknowledge their iniquity which they
have committed on the Earth and
through this they will be destroyed."
55.1 And after this, the Head of
Days repented, and said:
"I have destroyed to no purpose all
those who dwell upon the dry ground."
55.2 And he swore by His Great Name:
"From now on I will not act like this
towards all those who dwell upon the
dry ground. And I will put a sign in
Heaven, and it will be a pledge of faith
between me and them forever, so long
as Heaven is above the Earth.
55.3 And this will be in accordance with
my command. When I want to take
hold of them with the hands of the
Angels, on the day of distress and pain,
in the face of my anger and my wrath,
my wrath and anger will remain upon
them" says the Lord, The Lord of
Spirits.
55.4 "You powerful kings who dwell
upon the dry ground will be obliged to
watch my Chosen One sit down on the
throne of My Glory, and judge, in the
Name of the Lord of Spirits, Azazel and
all his associates and all his hosts."
56.1 And I saw there the hosts of the
Angels of Punishment, as they went,
and they were holding chains of iron
and bronze.
56.2 And I asked the Angel of Peace,
who went with me, saying:
"To whom are those who are holding
the chains going?"
56.3 And he said to me: "Each to his
own chosen ones, and to their beloved
ones, so that they may be thrown into
the chasm, in the depths of the valley."
56.4 And then, that valley will be filled
with their chosen and beloved ones, and
the days of their life will be at an end,
and the days of their leading astray will
no longer be counted.
56.5 And in those days, the Angels will
gather together, and will throw
themselves towards the east, upon the
Parthians and Medes. They will stir up
the kings so that a disturbing spirit will
come upon them, and they will drive
them from their thrones; and they will
come out like lions from their lairs, and
like hungry wolves in the middle of
their flocks.
56.6 And they will go up and trample
on the Land of My Chosen Ones, and
the land of my chosen ones will become
before them a tramping-ground and a
beaten track.
56.7 But the City of My Righteous Ones
will be a hindrance to their horses, and
they will stir up slaughter amongst
themselves, and their own right hand
will be strong against them. And a man
will not admit to knowing his
neighbour, or his brother, nor a son his
father, or his mother, until, through their
death, there are corpses enough; and
their punishment - it will not be in vain.
56.8 And in those days Sheol will open
its mouth and they will sink into it and
their destruction; Sheol will swallow up
the sinners in front of the faces of the
20
chosen."
57.1 And it came to pass, after this,
that I saw another host of chariots with
men riding on them, and they came
upon the wind from the east and from
the west, to the south.
57.2 And the sound of the noise of their
chariots was heard. And when this
occurred the Holy Ones observed it
from Heaven and the Pillars of the Earth
were shaken from their foundations.
And the sound was heard from the ends
of the Earth to the ends of Heaven
throughout one day.
57.3 And all will fall down and worship
the Lord of Spirits. And this is the end
of the second parable.
58.1 And I began to speak The
Third Parable. About The Righteous
and about The Chosen.
58.2 Blessed are you, the righteous and
the chosen, for your lot will be glorious!
58.3 And the righteous will be in the
light of the Sun and the chosen in the
light of eternal life. And there will be
no end to the days of their life and the
days of the Holy will be without
number.
58.4 And they will seek the light and
will find righteousness with the Lord of
Spirits. Peace be to the righteous with
the Lord of the World!
58.5 And after this it will be said to the
Holy that they should seek in Heaven
the secrets of righteousness, the lot of
faith; for it has become bright as the
Sun upon the dry ground, and darkness
has passed away.
58.6 And there will be ceaseless light,
and to a limit of days, they will not
come, for darkness will have been
destroyed previously. And the light will
endure in front of the Lord of Spirits,
and the light of uprightness will endure
in front of the Lord of Spirits, forever.
59.1 And in those days my eyes saw
the secrets of the flashes of lightning,
and the lights, and the regulations
governing them; and they flash for a
blessing or a curse, as the Lord of
Spirits wishes.
59.2 And there I saw the secrets of the
thunder and how when it crashes in
Heaven above the sound of it is heard.
And they showed me the dwellings of
the dry ground, and the sound of the
thunder, for peace, and for blessing, or
for a curse, according to the word of the
Lord of Spirits.
59.3 And after this all the secrets of the
lights, and of the flashes of lightning,
were shown to me. They flash to bring
blessing and satisfaction.
60.1 In the fiftieth year, in the
seventh month, on the fourteenth day of
the month of the life of Enoch. In that
parable, I saw how the Heaven of
Heavens was shaken violently, and the
Host of the Most High and the Angels, a
thousand thousands and ten thousand
times ten thousand, were extremely
disturbed.
60.2 And then I saw the Head of Days
sitting on the throne of his glory and the
Angels and righteous were sitting
around him.
60.3 And a great trembling seized me,
and fear took hold of me, and my loins
collapsed and gave way, and my whole
being melted, and I fell upon my face.
60.4 And the Holy Michael sent another
Holy Angel, one of the Holy Angels,
and he raised me; and when he raised
me my spirit returned, for I had been
unable to endure the sight of that host,
and the disturbance, and the shaking of
Heaven.
60.5 And the Holy Michael said to me:
“What sight has disturbed you like this?
Until today has the day of His mercy
lasted and He has been merciful and
long suffering towards those who dwell
21
upon the dry ground.
60.6 And when the Day, and the Power,
and the Punishment, and the Judgment
come that the Lord of Spirits has
prepared for those who worship the
Righteous Judgment, and for those who
deny the Righteous Judgment, and for
those who take His name in vain - and
that Day has been prepared. For the
chosen a covenant, but for the sinners a
visitation.”
60.7 And on that day two monsters will
be separated from one another, a female
monster whose name is Leviathan, to
dwell in the depths of the sea, above the
springs of the waters.
60.8 And the name of the male is
Behemoth who occupies with his breast
an immense desert named Dendayn on
the east of the Garden where the chosen
and the righteous dwell. Where my
great-grandfather was received, who
was seventh from Adam, the first man
whom the Lord of Spirits made.
60.9 And I asked that other Angel to
show me the power of those monsters,
how they were separated on one day,
and thrown, one into the depths of the
sea and the other on to the dry ground of
the desert.
60.10 And he said to me: “Son of man,
you here wish to know what is secret.”
60.11 And the other Angel spoke to me,
the one who went with me and showed
me what is secret; what is first and last
in Heaven, in the heights, and under the
dry ground, in the depths, and at the
Ends of Heaven, and at the Foundations
of Heaven, and in the Storehouses of the
Winds.
60.12 And how the spirits are
distributed, and how they are weighed.
And how the springs, and the winds, are
counted according to the power of their
spirit. And the power of the light of the
Moon. And the divisions of the stars
according to their names. And how all
the divisions are made.
60.13 And the thunder - according to
the places were it falls. And all the
divisions that are made in lightning - so
that it may flash. And its hosts - how
they quickly obey.
60.14 For the thunder have fixed
intervals, which have been given to its
sound, for waiting. And the thunder
and the lightning are not separate
although not the same. Through a spirit
the two of them move inseparably.
60.15 For when the lightning flashes the
thunder utters its voice, and the spirit, at
the proper time, causes it to rest, and
divides equally between them because
the storehouse of the times for their
occurrence is like that of the sand. And
each of them, at the proper time, is held
by a rein, and turned back by the power
of the spirit, and likewise driven
forward, according to the number of the
regions of the Earth.
60.16 And the spirit of the sea is male
and strong, and according to the power
of its strength, the spirit turns it back
with a rein, and likewise it is driven
forward, and scattered amongst all the
mountains of the Earth.
60.17 And the spirit of the hoarfrost is
its own Angel; and the spirit of the hail,
is a good Angel.
60.18 And the spirit of the snow has
withdrawn because of its power, and it
has a special spirit, and that which rises
from it is like smoke and its name is
frost.
60.19 And the spirit of the mist is not
associated with them in their storehouse
but has a special storehouse; for its
course is glorious both in light and
darkness, and in winter and in summer,
and its storehouse is an Angel.
60.20 The spirit of the dew has its
dwelling at the ends of Heaven and is
connected with the storehouses of the
rain. And its course is in winter and in
summer and its clouds. And the clouds
of the mist are associated and one gives
to the other.
60.21 And when the spirit of the rain
moves from its storehouse the Angels
come and open the storehouse and bring
22
it out. And when it is scattered over all
the dry ground it joins with all the water
that is on the dry ground. And
whenever it joins with the water that is
on the dry ground.(.…..)
60.22 For the waters are for those who
dwell upon the dry ground, for they are
nourishment for the dry ground, from
the Most High who is in Heaven.
Therefore there is a fixed measure for
the rain and the Angels comprehend it.
60.23 All these things, I saw towards
the Garden of Righteousness.
60.24 And the Angel of Peace who was
with me, said to me: “These two
monsters, prepared in accordance with
the greatness of the Lord, will feed them
that Punishment of the Lord. And
children will be killed with their
mothers and sons with their fathers.
60.25 When the punishment of the Lord
of Spirits rests upon them it will remain
resting so that the punishment of the
Lord of Spirits may not come in vain
upon these. Afterwards, the judgment
will be according to His mercy and His
patience."
61.1 And in those days, I saw long
cords given to those Angels and they
acquired wings for themselves, and
flew, and went towards the north.
61.2 And I asked the Angel, saying:
“Why did these take the long cords, and
go?” And he said to me: “They went
so that they may measure.”
61.3 And the Angel who went with me,
said to me:
“These will bring the measurements of
the righteous, and the ropes of the
righteous, to the righteous, that they
may rely on the name of the Lord of
Spirits for ever and ever.
61.4 The chosen will begin to dwell
with the chosen, and these
measurements will be given to faith, and
will strengthen righteousness.
61.5 And these measurements will
reveal all the secrets of the depths of the
Earth, and those who were destroyed by
the desert, and those who were
devoured by the fish of the sea, and by
animals, that they may return and rely
on the Day of the Chosen One. For no
one will be destroyed in front of the
Lord of Spirits, and no one can be
destroyed.”
61.6 And all those in the Heavens above
received a command, and power, and
one voice, and one light like fire was
given to them.
61.7 And Him, before everything, they
blessed, and exalted, and praised in
wisdom. And they showed themselves
wise in speech and in the spirit of life.
61.8 And the Lord of Spirits set the
Chosen One on the throne of his glory,
and he will judge all the works of the
Holy ones in Heaven above, and in the
Balance he will weigh their deeds.
61.9 And when he lifts his face to judge
their secret ways according to the word
of the name of the Lord of Spirits, and
their path according to the way of the
Righteous Judgment of the Lord Most
High, they will all speak with one voice
and bless, and praise, and exalt, and
glorify, the Name of the Lord of Spirits.
61.10 And he will call all the Host of
the Heavens and all the Holy Ones
above, and the Host of the Lord, the
Cherubim, and the Seraphim, and the
Ophannim, and all the Angels of Power,
and all the Angels of the Principalities,
and the Chosen One, and the other host
that is upon the dry ground, and over
the water, on that Day.
61.11 And they will raise one voice, and
will bless, and praise, and glorify, and
exalt, in the spirit of faith, and in the
spirit of wisdom, and of patience, and in
the spirit of mercy, and in the spirit of
justice, and of peace, and in the spirit of
goodness. And they will all say with
one voice: “Blessed is He, and blessed
be the name of the Lord of Spirits for
ever and ever.”
61.12 All Those Who Do Not Sleep in
Heaven above will bless him. All His
Holy Ones who are in Heaven, will
23
bless Him, and all the chosen ones who
dwell in the Garden of Life, and every
spirit able to bless, and praise and exalt,
and hallow your Holy Name. And all
flesh which to the limit of its power,
will praise, and bless, your Name
forever and ever.
61.13 For great is the mercy of the Lord
of Spirits, and he is long-suffering; and
all his works and all his forces, as many
as he has made, he has revealed to the
righteous and the chosen, in the Name
of the Lord of Spirits.
62.1 And thus the Lord commanded
the kings, and the mighty and the
exalted, and those who dwell upon the
earth, and said: “Open your eyes and
raise your horns if you are able to
acknowledge the Chosen One.”
62.2 And the Lord of Spirits sat on His
Throne of Glory, and the spirit of
righteousness was poured out on him,
and the word of his mouth kills all the
sinners and all the lawless, and they are
destroyed in front of him.
62.3 And on that Day, all the kings and
the mighty and the exalted, and those
who possess the earth, will stand up and
they will see and recognize how he sits
on the Throne of His Glory. And the
righteous are judged in righteousness, in
front of him, and no idle word is spoken
in front of him.
62.4 And pain will come upon them as
upon a woman in labour, for whom
giving birth is difficult when her child
enters the mouth of the womb, and she
has difficulty giving birth.
62.5 And one half of them will look at
the other, and they will be terrified, and
will cast down their faces, and pain will
take hold of them when they see that
son of a woman sitting on the throne of
His Glory.
62.6 And the mighty kings, and all
those who possess the earth, will praise
and bless and exalt Him who rules
everything that is hidden.
62.7 For from the beginning that Son of
Man was hidden, and the Most High
kept him in the presence of His power,
and revealed him only to the chosen.
62.8 And the community of the Holy
and the chosen will be sown and all the
chosen will stand before him on that
day.
62.9 And all the mighty kings, and the
exalted, and those who rule the dry
ground, will fall down before him, on
their faces, and worship; and they will
set their hopes on that Son of Man, and
will entreat him, and will petition for
mercy from him.
62.10 But the Lord of Spirits will then
so press them that they will hasten to go
out from before Him, and their faces
will be filled with shame, and the
darkness will grow deeper on their
faces.
62.11 And the Angels of Punishment
will take them so that they may repay
them for the wrong that they did to His
children and to His chosen ones.
62.12 And they will become a spectacle
to the righteous and to His chosen ones;
they will rejoice over them, for the
anger of the Lord of Spirits will rest
upon them, and the sword of the Lord of
Spirits will be drunk with them.
62.13 And the righteous and the chosen
will be saved on that Day and they will
never see the faces of the sinners and
the lawless from then on.
62.14 And the Lord of Spirits will
remain over them and with that Son of
Man they will dwell, and eat, and lie
down, and rise up, forever and ever.
62.15 And the righteous and chosen will
have risen from the earth, and will have
ceased to cast down their faces, and will
have put on the Garment of Life.
62.16 And this will be a Garment of
Life from the Lord of Spirits; and your
garments will not wear out, and your
glory will not fail, in front of the Lord
of Spirits.
63.1 In those days, the mighty kings
who possess the dry ground will entreat
24
the Angels of His Punishment to whom
they have been handed over so that they
might give them a little respite. And so
that they might fall down and worship
in front of the Lord of Spirits, and
confess their sins in front of Him.
63.2 And they will bless and praise the
Lord of Spirits, and say: “Blessed be
the Lord of Spirits, and the Lord of
Kings, the Lord of the Mighty, and the
Lord of the Rich, and the Lord of Glory,
and the Lord of Wisdom!
63.3 And everything secret is clear, in
front of You, and your power is for all
generations, and your glory is forever
and ever. Deep and without number are
all your secrets and your righteousness
is beyond reckoning.
63.4 Now we realize that we ought to
praise and bless the Lord of Kings and
the one who is King over all Kings.”
63.5 And they will say: “Would that we
might be given a respite, so that we
might praise and thank and bless him,
and make our confession in front of His
Glory.
63.6 And now we long for a respite, but
do not find it; we are driven off and do
not obtain it; and the light has passed
away from before us, and darkness will
be our dwelling forever and ever.
63.7 For we have not made our
confession before him, and we have not
praised the name of the Lord of Kings,
and we have not praised the Lord for all
his works, but our hopes have been on
the sceptre of our kingdom, and of our
glory.
63.8 And on the day of our affliction
and distress he does not save us, and we
find no respite to make our confession
that our Lord is faithful in all his
doings, and in all his judgments and his
justice, and that his judgments show no
respect for persons.
63.9 And we pass away from in front of
him because of all our works and all our
sins have been counted exactly.”
63.10 Then they will say to them: “Our
souls are sated with possessions gained
through iniquity, but they do not
prevent our going down into the flames
of the torment of Sheol.”
63.11 And after this their faces will be
filled with darkness and shame, in front
of that Son of Man, and they will be
driven away from him. And the sword
will dwell among them - in front of
Him.
63.12 And thus says the Lord of Spirits:
“This is the Law and the Judgment for
the mighty, and the kings, and the
exalted, and for those who possess the
dry ground, in front of the Lord of
Spirits.”
64.1 And I saw other figures hidden
in that place.
64.2 I heard the voice of the Angel
saying: “These are the Angels who
came down from Heaven onto the Earth
and revealed what is secret to the sons
of men, and led astray the sons of men,
so that they committed sin.”
65.1 And in those days, Noah saw
the Earth had tilted and that its
destruction was near.
65.2 And he set off from there and went
to the ends of the Earth and cried out to
his great-grandfather Enoch; and Noah
said three times in a bitter voice: "Hear
me, hear me, hear me!"
65.3 And he said to him: "Tell me,
what is it that is being done on the
Earth, that the Earth is so afflicted and
shaken, lest I be destroyed with it!"
65.4 And immediately there was a great
disturbance on the Earth and a voice
was heard from Heaven and I fell upon
my face.
65.5 And my great-grandfather Enoch
came, stood by me, and said to me:
"Why did you cry out to me, with such
bitter crying and weeping?
65.6 And a command has gone out from
the Lord against those who dwell upon
the dry ground that this must be their
25
end. For they have learnt all the secrets
of the Angels, and all the wrongdoings
of the satans, and all their secret power,
and all the power of those who practice
magic arts, and the power of
enchantments, and the power of those
who cast molten images for all the
Earth.
65.7 And further, how silver is
produced from the dust of the earth and
how soft metal occurs on the earth.
65.8 For lead and tin are not produced
from the earth, like the former; there is a
spring which produces them, and an
Angel who stands in it, and that Angel
distributes them."
65.9 And after this, my greatgrandfather Enoch took hold of me with
his hand, and raised me, and said to me:
"Go, for I have asked the Lord of Spirits
about this disturbance on the earth."
65.10 And he said to me: “Because of
their iniquity, their judgment has been
completed, and they will no longer be
counted before me; because of the
sorceries they have searched out and
learnt, the Earth and those who dwell
upon it will be destroyed.
65.11 And for these, there will be no
place of refuge, for ever, for they
showed to them what is secret, and they
have been condemned; but not so for
you, my son; the Lord of Spirits knows
that you are pure and innocent of this
reproach concerning the secrets.
65.12 And he has established your name
among the Holy, and will keep you
from amongst those who dwell upon the
dry ground; and he has destined your
offspring in righteousness, to be kings,
and for great honours. And from your
offspring will flow out a spring of the
Righteous and Holy, without number
forever.”
66.1 And after this, he showed me
the Angels of Punishment, who were
ready to come and release all the forces
of the water, which is under the earth, in
order to bring judgment and destruction
on all those who reside and dwell upon
the dry ground.
66.2 And the Lord of Spirits
commanded the Angels who were
coming out, not to raise their hands, but
to keep watch; for those Angels were in
charge of the forces of the waters.
66.3 And I came out from before Enoch.
67.1 And in those days, the word of
the Lord came to me, and he said to me:
"Noah, behold; your lot has come up
before me, a lot without reproach, a lot
of love and uprightness.
67.2 And now the Angels are making a
wooden structure, and when the Angels
come out from that task, I will put my
hand on it, and keep it safe. And a
change shall take place so that the dry
ground may not remain empty.
67.3 And I will establish your offspring
before me, forever and ever, and I will
scatter those who dwell with you, over
the face of the dry ground. I will not
again put them to the test, on the face of
the Earth, but they will be blessed and
increase on the dry ground in the name
of the Lord."
67.4 And they will shut up those
Angels, who showed iniquity, in that
burning valley, which my greatgrandfather Enoch had shown to me
previously, in the west, near the
mountains of gold and silver and iron
and soft metal and tin.
67.5 And I saw that valley, in which
there was a great disturbance, and a
heaving of the waters.
67.6 And when all this happened, from
the fiery molten metal, and the
disturbance, which disturbed the waters
in that place, a smell of sulphur was
produced, and it was associated with
those waters. And that valley of the
Angels, who led men astray, burns
under the ground.
67.7 And through the valleys of that
same area, flow out rivers of fire where
those Angels will be punished, who led
astray those on the dry ground.
26
67.8 And in those days, those waters
will serve the kings, and the mighty,
and the exalted, and those who dwell
upon dry ground, for the healing of soul
and body, but also for the punishment of
the spirit. And their spirits are so full of
lust that they will be punished in their
bodies, for they denied the Lord of
Spirits. And they see their punishment
every day yet they do not believe in His
Name.
67.9 And the more their bodies are
burnt, the more a change will come over
their spirits, for ever and ever; for no
one can speak an idle word in front of
the Lord of Spirits.
67.10 For judgment will come upon
them, for they believe in the lust of their
bodies, but deny the spirit of the Lord.
67.11 And those same waters will
undergo a change in those days; for
when those Angels are punished in
those days, the temperature of those
springs of water will change, and when
the Angels come up, that water of the
springs will change, and become cold.
67.12 And I heard the Holy Michael
answering and saying: "This judgment,
with which the Angels are judged, is a
testimony for the kings and the mighty
who possess the dry ground.
67.13 For these waters of judgment
serve for the healing of the bodies of the
kings, and for the lust of their bodies;
but they do not see, and do not believe,
that these waters will change, and will
become a fire which burns forever."
68.1 And after this, my greatgrandfather Enoch gave me the
explanation of all the secrets, in a book,
and the parables that had been given to
him; and he put them together for me, in
the words of the Book of Parables.
68.2 And on that day the Holy Michael
answered Raphael, saying: “The power
of the spirit seizes me and makes me
tremble because of the harshness of the
judgment of the Angels. Who can
endure the harshness of the judgment
which has been executed and before
which they melt with fear?”
68.3 And the Holy Michael answered
Raphael again, and said to him: “Who
would not soften his heart over it, and
whose mind would not be disturbed by
this word? Judgment has gone out
against them, upon those whom they
have led out like this.”
68.4 But it came to pass, when he stood
before the Lord of Spirits, that the Holy
Michael spoke as follows to Raphael:
“I will not take their part under the eye
of the Lord, for the Lord of Spirits is
angry with them, because they act as if
they were the Lord.
68.5 Because of this the hidden
judgment will come upon them for ever
and ever; for neither any other Angel,
nor any man, will receive their lot, but
they alone have received their judgment
for ever and ever.
69.1 And after this judgment I will
terrify them, and make them tremble,
for they have shown this to those who
dwell upon the dry ground.”
69.2 And behold, the names of those
Angels: - The first of them is Semyaza
(Azza), and the second Artaqifa, and
the third Armen, and the fourth
Kokabiel, and the fifth Turiel, and the
sixth Ramiel, and the seventh Daniel,
and the eighth Nuqael, and the ninth
Baraqiel, and the tenth Azazel, and the
eleventh Armaros, the twelfth Batriel,
the thirteenth Basasael, the fourteenth
Ananel, the fifteenth Turiel, the
sixteenth Samsiel, the seventeenth
Yetarel, the eighteenth Tumiel, the
nineteenth Turiel, the twentieth
Rumiel, the twenty-first Azazel.
69.3 And these are the chiefs of their
Angels, and the names of the leaders of
hundreds, and their leaders of fifties,
and their leaders of tens.
69.4 The name of the first is Yequn; this
is the one who led astray all the children
of the Holy Angels, and he brought
them down onto the dry ground, and led
27
them astray through the daughters of
men.
69.5 And the name of the second is
Asbeel; this one suggested an evil plan
to the children of the Holy Angels, and
led them astray, so that they corrupted
their bodies with the daughters of men.
69.6 And the name of the third is
Gadreel; this is the one that showed all
the deadly blows to the sons of men.
And he led astray Eve. And he showed
the weapons of death to the children of
men, the shield and the breastplate, and
the sword for slaughter, and all the
weapons of death to the sons of men.
69.7 And from his hand they have gone
out against those who dwell the dry
ground from that time and forever and
ever.
69.8 And the name of the fourth is
Penemue; this one showed the sons of
men the bitter and the sweet and showed
them all the secrets of their wisdom.
69.9 He taught men the art of writing
with ink and paper, and through this
many have gone astray, from eternity to
eternity, and to this day.
69.10 For men were not created for this,
that they should confirm their faith like
this, with pen and ink.
69.11 For men were created no
differently from the Angels, so that they
might remain righteous and pure, and
death, which destroys everything, would
not have touched them; but through this
knowledge of theirs they are being
destroyed and through this power death
consumes them.
69.12 And the name of the fifth is
Kasdeyae; this one showed the sons of
men all the evil blows of the spirits and
of the demons, and the blows that attack
the embryo in the womb so that it
miscarries. And the blows that attack
the soul: the bite of the serpent. And
the blows that occur at midday, and the
son of the serpent - who is strong.
69.13 And this is the task of Kesbeel,
the chief of the oath, who showed the
oath to the Holy ones when he dwelt on
high in glory. And his name is Beqa.
69.14 And this one told the Holy
Michael that he should show him the
secret name so that they might mention
it in the oath, so that those, who showed
the sons of men everything that is
secret, trembled before that name and
oath.
69.15 And this is the power of this oath,
for it is powerful and strong, and he
placed this oath, Akae, in the charge of
the Holy Michael.
69.16 And these are the secrets of this
oath, and they are strong through this
oath, and Heaven was suspended, before
the world was created, and forever.
69.17 And through it the earth was
founded upon the water, and from the
hidden recesses of the mountains come
beautiful waters, from the creation of
the world and for ever.
69.18 And through that oath the sea was
created, and as its foundation, for the
time of anger, he placed for it the sand,
and it does not go beyond it, from the
creation of the world and for ever.
69.19 And through that oath the deeps
were made firm, and they stand and do
not move from their place, from the
creation of the world and for ever.
69.20 And through that oath the Sun
and the Moon complete their course and
do not transgress their command, from
the creation of the world and for ever.
69.21 And through that oath the stars
complete their course, and he calls their
names, and they answer him, from the
creation of the world and for ever.
69.22 And likewise the spirits of the
water, of the winds, and of all the
breezes, and their paths, according to all
the groups of the spirits.
69.23 And there are kept the
storehouses of the sound of thunder, and
of the light of the lightning; and there
are kept the storehouses of the hail, and
the hoarfrost, and the storehouses of the
mist, and the storehouses of the rain and
dew.
69.24 And all these make their
28
confession and give thanks in front of
the Lord of Spirits and sing praises with
all their power. And their food consists
of all their thanksgiving and they give
thanks, praise, and exalt, in the name of
the Lord of Spirits, forever and ever.
69.25 And this oath is strong over them
and through it they are kept safe and
their courses are not disturbed.
69.26 And they had great joy and they
blessed, praised, and exalted, because
the name of that Son of Man had been
revealed to them.
69.27 And he sat on the Throne of His
Glory and the whole judgment was
given to the Son of Man and he will
cause the sinners to pass away and be
destroyed from the face of the Earth.
69.28 And those who led astray the
world will be bound in chains and will
be shut up in the assembly-place of their
destruction, and all their works will pass
away from the face of the earth.
69.29 And from then on there will be
nothing corruptible. For that Son of
Man has appeared, and has sat on the
Throne of His Glory, and everything
evil will pass away and go from in front
of Him; and the word of that Son of
Man will be strong in front of the Lord
of Spirits.
This is the Third Parable of Enoch.
70.1 And it came to pass, after this,
that while he was living his name was
lifted from those who dwell upon the
dry ground to the presence of that Son
of Man, and to the presence of the Lord
of Spirits.
70.2 And he was lifted on the chariots
of the spirit, and his name vanished
from among them.
70.3 And from that day I was not
counted among them, and He placed me
between two winds, between the north
and the west, where the Angels took the
cords to measure for me the place for
the chosen and the righteous.
70.4 And there I saw the First Fathers
and the righteous who from the
beginning of the world dwelt in that
place.
71.1 And it came to pass, after this,
that my spirit was carried off, and it
went up into the Heavens. I saw the
sons of the Holy Angels treading upon
flames of fire their garments were
white, and their clothing, and the light
of their face, was like snow.
71.2 And I saw two rivers of fire, and
the light of that fire shone like a
hyacinth, and I fell upon my face in
front of the Lord of Spirits.
71.3 And the Angel Michael, one of the
Archangels, took hold of me by my
right hand, and raised me and led me
out to all the secrets of mercy, and the
secrets of righteousness.
71.4 And he showed me all the secrets
of the Ends of Heaven and all the
Storehouses of the Stars and the Lights
from where they come out from below
the Holy Ones.
71.5 And the Spirit carried Enoch off to
the Highest Heaven, and I saw there, in
the middle of that Light, something
built of crystal stones, and in the middle
of those stones tongues of living fire.
71.6 And my spirit saw a circle of fire,
which surrounded that house; from its
four sides came rivers, full of living fire,
and they surrounded that house.
71.7 And round about were the
Seraphim and the Cherubim, and the
Ophannim; these are They Who Do Not
Sleep but keep watch over the Throne of
His Glory.
71.8 And I saw Angels, who could not
be counted, a thousand thousands and
ten thousand times ten thousand,
surrounding that house. And Michael,
and Raphael, and Gabriel, and Phanuel,
and the Holy Angels who are in the
Heavens above, went in and out of that
house.
71.9 And Michael, and Raphael, and
Gabriel, and Phanuel, and many Holy
Angels without number, came out from
29
that house.
71.10 And with them the Head of Days,
his head white, and pure, like wool and
his garments - indescribable.
71.11 And I fell upon my face, and my
whole body melted, and my spirit was
transformed; and I cried out in a loud
voice, in the spirit of power, and I
blessed, praised, and exalted.
71.12 And these blessings, which came
out from my mouth, were pleasing
before that Head of Days.
71.13 And that Head of Days came with
Michael, Gabriel, Raphael and Phanuel,
and thousands and tens of thousands of
Angels without number.
71.14 And that Angel, came to me, and
greeted me with his voice, and said to
me: “You are the son of man who was
born to righteousness and righteousness
remains over you and the righteousness
of the Head of Days, will not leave
you.”
71.15 And he said to me: “He
proclaims peace to you in the name of
the world which is to come, for from
there peace has come out from the
creation of the world and so you will
have it for ever and for ever and ever.
71.16 And all will walk according to
your way, inasmuch as righteousness
will never leave you. With you will be
their dwelling, and with you their lot,
and they will not be separated from you
for ever and for ever and ever.
71.17 And so there will be length of
days with that Son of Man, and the
righteous will have peace, and the
righteous will have an upright way in
the name of the Lord of Spirits, for ever
and ever.”
Section I I I. Chapters LXXIILXXXII
The Book of the Heavenly
Luminaries
72.1 The Book of the Revolutions
of the Lights of Heaven.
Each as it is; according to their classes,
according to their period of rule and
their times, according to their names
and places of origin, and according to
their months. That Uriel, the Holy
Angel who was with me, and is their
leader, showed to me. And he showed
me all their regulations, exactly as they
are, for each year of the world and for
ever, until the new creation shall be
made which will last forever.
72.2 And this is the First Law of the
Lights. The light called the Sun; its
rising is in the Gates of Heaven that are
towards the east, and its setting is in the
western Gates of Heaven.
72.3 And I saw six Gates from which
the Sun rises, and six Gates in which the
Sun sets, and the Moon also rises and
sets in those Gates, and the leaders of
the stars together with those whom they
lead. There are six in the east and six in
the west, all exactly in place, one next
to the other; and there are many
windows to the south and the north of
those Gates.
72.4 And first there rises the greater
light, named the Sun, and its disc is like
the disc of Heaven, and the whole of it
is full of a fire which gives light and
warmth.
72.5 The wind blows the chariots on
which it ascends, and the Sun goes
down in the sky and returns through the
north in order to reach the east, and is
led so that it comes to the appropriate
Gate and shines in the sky.
72.6 In this way it rises in the first
30
month, in the large Gate, namely; it
rises through the fourth of those six
Gates that are towards the east.
72.7 And in that fourth Gate, through
which the Sun rises in the first month,
there are twelve window-openings from
which, whenever they are opened,
flames come out.
72.8 When the Sun rises in Heaven it
goes out through that fourth Gate for
thirty days, and exactly in the fourth
Gate, in the west of Heaven, it goes
down.
72.9 And in those days the day grows
daily longer, and the night grows
nightly shorter, until the thirtieth
morning.
72.10 And on that day the day becomes
longer than the night by a double part,
and the day amounts to exactly ten
parts, and the night amounts to eight
parts.
72.11 And the Sun rises from that fourth
Gate, and sets in the fourth Gate, and
returns to the fifth Gate in the east for
thirty mornings; and it rises from it and
sets in the fifth Gate.
72.12 And then the day becomes longer
by two parts, and the day amounts to
eleven parts, and the night becomes
shorter and amounts to seven parts.
72.13 And the Sun returns to the east
and comes to the sixth Gate, and rises
and sets in the sixth Gate for thirty-one
mornings, because of its sign.
72.14 And on that day the day becomes
longer than the night, and the day
becomes double the night; and the day
amounts to twelve parts, and the night
becomes shorter and amounts to six
parts.
72.15 And the Sun rises up so that the
day may grow shorter, and the night
longer; and the Sun returns to the east,
and comes to the sixth Gate, and rises
from it, and sets, for thirty mornings.
72.16 And when thirty mornings have
been completed the day becomes
shorter, by exactly one part; and the day
amounts to eleven parts, and the night to
seven parts.
72.17 And the Sun goes out from the
west, through that sixth Gate, and goes
to the east, and rises in the fifth Gate for
thirty mornings and it sets in the west
again, in the fifth Gate in the west.
72.18 On that day the day becomes
shorter by two parts, and the day
amounts to ten parts, and the night to
eight parts.
72.19 And the Sun rises from that fifth
Gate, and sets in the fifth Gate in the
west, and rises in the fourth Gate for
thirty-one mornings because of its sign,
and sets in the west.
72.20 On that day the day becomes
equal with the night, and is of equal
length; and the night amounts to nine
parts, and the day to nine parts.
72.21 And the Sun rises from that Gate
and sets in the west, and returns to the
east, and rises in the third Gate for thirty
mornings, and sets in the west in the
third Gate.
72.22 And the Sun rises from that third
Gate, and sets in the third Gate in the
west, and returns to the east; and the
Sun rises in the second Gate in the east
for thirty mornings, and likewise, it sets
in the second Gate, in the west of
Heaven.
72.24 And on that day the night
amounts to eleven parts and the day to
seven parts.
72.25 And the Sun rises, on that day,
from the second Gate, and sets in the
west in the second Gate, and returns to
the east to the first Gate for thirty-one
mornings, then sets in the west in the
first Gate.
72.26 And on that day the night
becomes longer, and becomes double
the day; and the night amounts to
exactly twelve parts, and the day to six
parts.
72.27 And with this, the Sun has
completed the divisions of its journey,
and it turns back again, along these
divisions of its journey; and it comes
through that first Gate for thirty
31
mornings, and sets in the west opposite
it.
72.28 And on that day the night
becomes shorter in length by one part,
and amounts to eleven parts, and the
day to seven parts.
72.29 And the Sun returns, and comes
to the second Gate in the east, and it
returns along those divisions of its
journey for thirty mornings, rising and
setting.
72.30 And on that day the night
becomes shorter in length and the night
amounts to ten parts and the day to eight
parts.
72.31 And on that day, the Sun rises
from the second Gate, and sets in the
west, and returns to the east, and rises in
the third Gate for thirty one mornings,
and sets in the west of the sky.
72.32 And on that day the night
becomes shorter, and amounts to nine
parts, and the day amounts to nine parts,
and the night becomes equal with the
day. And the year amounts to exactly
364 days.
72.33 And the length of the day and the
night, and the shortness of the day and
the night - they are different because of
the journey of the Sun.
72.34 Because of it, its journey becomes
daily longer, and nightly shorter.
72.35 And this is the law and the
journey of the Sun and its return, as
often as it returns; sixty times it returns
and rises, that is the great eternal light,
which for ever and ever is named the
Sun.
72.36 And this that rises is the great
light, which is named after its
appearance, as the Lord commanded.
72.37 And thus it rises and sets; it
neither decreases, nor rests, but runs day
and night in its chariot. And its light is
seven times brighter than that of the
Moon but in size the two are equal.
73.1 And after this law I saw another
law, for the lesser light, named the
Moon.
73.2 And its disc is like the disc of the
Sun, and the wind blows its chariot on
which it rides, and in fixed measure
light is given to it.
73.3 And every month it’s rising and
setting change, and its days are as the
days of the Sun, and when its light is
uniformly full, it is a seventh part the
light of the Sun.
73.4 And thus it rises, and its first phase
is towards the east; it rises on the
thirtieth morning. And on that day it
appears, and becomes for you the first
phase of the Moon, on the thirtieth
morning, together with the Sun in the
Gate through which the Sun rises.
73.5 And a half.(…..) .with a seventh
part, and its entire disc is empty,
without light, except for a seventh part,
a fourteenth part of it’s light.
73.6 And on the day that it receives a
seventh part and a half of its light, its
light amounts to a seventh, and a
seventh part and a half.
73.7 It sets with the Sun, and when the
Sun rises, the Moon rises with it, and
receives a half of one part of light. And
on that night at the beginning of its
morning, at the beginning of the Moon's
day, the Moon sets with the Sun, and is
dark on that night in six and seven parts
and a half.
73.8 And it rises on that day, with
exactly a seventh part, goes out, recedes
from the rising of the Sun, and becomes
bright on the remainder of its days, in
the other six and seven parts.
74.1 And another journey, and law, I
saw for it, in that according to this law it
makes its monthly journey.
74.2 And Uriel, the Holy Angel who is
leader of them all, showed me
everything, and I wrote down their
positions as he showed them to me.
And I wrote down their months, as they
are, and the appearance of their light,
until fifteen days have been completed.
74.3 In seventh parts it makes all its
darkness full, and in seventh parts it
32
makes all its light full, in the east and in
the west.
74.4 And in certain months, it changes
its setting, and in certain months, it
follows its own individual course.
74.5 In two months it sets with the Sun,
in those two Gates that are in the
middle, in the third and in the fourth
Gate.
74.6 It goes out for seven days and turns
back, and returns again to the Gate from
which the Sun rises. And in that Gate it
makes all its light full, and it recedes
from the Sun, and comes, in eight days,
to the sixth Gate from which the Sun
rises.
74.7 And when the Sun rises from the
fourth Gate, the Moon goes out for
seven days, until it rises from the fifth
Gate. And again it returns in seven days
to the fourth Gate, makes all its light
full, recedes, and comes to the first Gate
in eight days.
74.8 And again it returns in seven days
to the fourth Gate from which the Sun
rises.
74.9 Thus I saw their positions; how the
Moon rose and the Sun set in those
days.
74.10 And if five years are added
together, the Sun has an excess of thirty
days. For each year, of the five years,
there are three hundred and sixty four
days.
74.11 And the excess, of the Sun and
the stars, comes to six days. In five
years, with six days each, they have an
excess of thirty days, and the Moon falls
behind the Sun and the stars by thirty
days.
74.12 And the Moon conducts the years
exactly, all of them according to their
eternal positions; they are neither early
nor late, even by one day, but change
the year in exactly 364 days.
74.13 In three years, there are 1,092
days, and in five years 1,820 days, so
that in eight years there are 2,912 days.
74.14 For the Moon alone, the days in
three years come to 1,062 days, and in
five years it is fifty days behind.
74.15 And there are 1,770 days in five
years so that for the Moon the days in
eight years amount to 2,832 days.
74.16 For the difference in eight years is
eighty days, and all the days that the
Moon is behind, in eight years, are
eighty days.
74.17 And the year is completed
exactly, in accordance with their
positions, and the positions of the Sun,
in that they rise from the Gates from
which the Sun rises and sets for thirty
days.
75.1 And the leaders of the tens of
thousands, who are in charge of the
whole of creation, and in charge of all
the stars, and also the four days which
are added, and are not separated from
their position, according to the whole
reckoning of the year. And these serve
on the four days that are not counted in
the reckoning of the year.
75.2 And because of them men go
wrong in them. For these lights really
serve in the stations of the world, one in
the first Gate, and one in the third Gate,
and one in the fourth Gate, and one in
the sixth Gate. And the exact harmony
of the world is completed in the separate
364 stations of the world.
75.3 For the signs, and the times, and
the years, and the days, were showed to
me by the Angel Uriel whom the Lord
of Eternal Glory has placed in charge of
all the Lights of Heaven. In Heaven and
in the world, so that they might rule on
the Face of Heaven, and appear over the
earth, and be leaders of day and night;
the Sun, the Moon, the stars, and all the
serving creatures who revolve in all the
Chariots of Heaven.
75.4 Likewise, Uriel showed to me
twelve Gate-openings in the disc of the
chariot of the Sun, in the sky, from
which the rays of the Sun come out.
And from them heat comes out over the
Earth when they are opened at the times
that are appointed for them.
33
75.5 And there are openings for the
winds, and for the spirit of the dew,
when they are opened at their times,
opened in Heaven, at the ends of the
earth.
75.6 I saw twelve Gates in Heaven, at
the ends of the earth, from which the
Sun, and the Moon, and the stars, and
all the works of Heaven, go out in the
east and in the west.
75.7 And there are many windowopenings to the north and to the south,
and each window, at its appointed time,
sends out heat corresponding to those
Gates, from which the stars go out, in
accordance with His command to them,
and in which they set according to their
number.
75.8 And I saw chariots in Heaven,
running through the region above those
Gates, in which the stars that never set
rotate.
75.9 And one is bigger than all the
others. And it goes round through the
whole world.
76.1 And at the ends of the earth, I
saw twelve Gates open to all the winds,
from which the winds come out and
blow over the earth.
76.2 Three of them open in the front of
Heaven, and three in the back, and three
on the right of Heaven, and three on the
left.
76.3 And the three first are those
towards the east, and then the three
towards the north, and the three after
these towards the south, and the three in
the west.
76.4 Through four of them come winds
of blessing and peace. And from the
other eight come winds of punishment;
when they are sent they bring
devastation to the whole Earth, and to
the water which is on it, and to all those
who dwell upon it, and to everything
that is in the water and on dry ground.
76.5 And the first wind from those
Gates, called the east wind, comes out
through the first Gate, which is towards
the east. The one that comes from the
south brings devastation, drought, heat,
and destruction.
76.6 And through the second Gate, in
the middle, comes what is right. And
from it come rain, and fruitfulness, and
prosperity, and dew. And through the
third Gate, which is towards the north,
comes cold and drought.
76.7 And after these, the winds towards
the south come out, through three Gates.
First, through the first of the Gates,
which inclines towards the east, comes a
hot wind.
76.8 And through the middle Gate,
which is next to it, come pleasant
fragrances, and dew, and rain, and
prosperity, and life.
76.9 And through the third Gate, which
is towards the west, come dew, and rain,
and locusts, and devastation.
76.10 And after these, the winds
towards the north..(…)..from the
seventh Gate, which is towards the east,
come dew and rain, locusts and
devastation.
76.11 And through the Gate exactly in
the middle, come rain, and dew, and
life, and prosperity. And through the
third Gate, which is towards the west
come mist and hoarfrost, and snow, and
rain, and dew, and locusts.
76.12 And after these the winds towards
the west. Through the first Gate, which
inclines towards the north, come dew,
and rain, and hoarfrost, and cold, and
snow, and frost.
76.13 And from the middle Gate, come
dew and rain, prosperity and blessing.
And through the last Gate, which is
towards the south, come drought and
devastation, burning and destruction.
76.14 And thus the twelve Gates, of the
four quarters of Heaven are complete.
And all their laws, and all their
punishments, and all their benefits, I
have shown to you, my son Methuselah.
77.1 They called the first quarter
eastern because it is the first, and they
34
call the second the south because there
the Most High descends, and there
especially the one who is blessed
forever descends.
77.2 And the western quarter is called
waning because there all the lights of
Heaven wane and go down.
77.3 And the fourth quarter, named the
north, is divided into three parts. And
the first of them is the dwelling place
for men; and the second contains seas of
water, and the deeps, and the forests,
and rivers, and darkness and mist; and
the third part contains the Garden of
Righteousness.
77.4 I saw seven high mountains, which
were higher than all other mountains on
the earth; and from them snow comes.
And days and times and years, pass
away and go by.
77.5 I saw seven rivers on the earth,
larger than all the other rivers; one of
them comes from the east and pours out
its waters into the Great Sea.
77.6 And two of them come from the
north to the sea and pour out their water
into the Erythraean Sea in the east.
77.7 And the remaining four flow out
on the side of the north, to their seas,
two to the Erythraean Sea, and two into
the Great Sea, and they discharge
themselves there, and not into the
wilderness, as some say.
77.8 I saw seven large islands, in the sea
and on the land, two on the land, and
five in the Great Sea.
78.1 The names of the Sun are as
follows: The first Oryares, and the
second Tomases.
78.2 The Moon has four names: The
first name is Asonya, and the second
Ebla, and the third Benase, and the
fourth Era'e.
78.3 These are the two great lights; their
disc is like the disc of Heaven and in
size the two are equal.
78.4 In the disc of the Sun, are seven
parts of light, which are added to it
more than to the Moon, and in fixed
measure light is transferred to the Moon
until a seventh part of the Sun is
exhausted.
78.5 And they set, go into the Gates of
the west, go round through the north,
and rise through the Gates of the east,
on the face of Heaven.
78.6 And when the Moon rises, it
appears in the sky, and has a half of a
seventh part of light, and on the
fourteenth day it makes all its light full.
78.7 And fifteen parts of light are
transferred to it, until on the fifteenth
day its light is full, according to the sign
of the year, and amounts to fifteen parts.
And the Moon comes into being by
halves of a seventh part.
78.8 And in its waning on the first day,
it decreases to fourteen parts of its light.
And on the second to thirteen parts, and
on the third to twelve parts, on the
fourth to eleven parts, and on the fifth to
ten parts, and on the sixth to nine parts,
and on the seventh to eight parts, and on
the eighth to seven parts, and on the
ninth to six parts, and on the tenth to
five parts, and on the eleventh to four
parts, and on the twelfth to three, and on
the thirteenth to two, and on the
fourteenth to half of a seventh part.
And all the light that remains from the
total disappears on the fifteenth day.
78.9 And in certain months the Moon
has twenty-nine days and once twentyeight.
78.10 And Uriel showed me another
law: - when light is transferred to the
Moon, and on which side it is
transferred from the Sun.
78.11 All the time that the Moon is
increasing in its light, it transfers as it
becomes opposite the Sun, until in
fourteen days it’s light is full in the sky;
and when it is all ablaze, it’s light is full
in the sky.
78.12 And on the first day it is called
the New Moon, for on that, daylight
rises on it.
78.13 And its light becomes full exactly
on the day that as the Sun goes down in
35
the west it rises from the east for the
night. And the Moon shines for the
whole night until the Sun rises opposite
it, and the Moon is seen opposite the
Sun.
78.14 And on the side on which the
light of the Moon appears, there again it
wanes, until all its light disappears, and
the days of the Moon end and its disc
remains empty without light.
78.15 And for three months, at its
proper time, it achieves thirty days, and
for three months, it achieves twentynine days, during which it completes its
waning, in the first period, in the first
Gate, 127 days.
78.16 And in the time of it’s rising, for
three months, it appears in each month
with thirty days. And for three months
it appears in each month with twentynine days
78.17 By night, for twenty days each
time, it looks like a man, and by day
like Heaven, for there is nothing else in
it except it’s light.
79.1 And now, my son Methuselah, I
have shown you everything, and the
whole Law of the Stars of Heaven is
complete.
79.2 And he showed me the whole law
for these, for every day, and for every
time, and for every rule, and for every
year, and for the end thereof, according
to its command, for every month and
every week.
79.3 And the waning of the Moon,
which occurs in the sixth Gate, for in
that sixth Gate it’s light becomes full,
and after that it is the beginning of the
month.
79.4 And the waning, which occurs in
the first Gate, at its proper time, until
127 days are complete, or by weeks;
twenty-five weeks and two days.
79.5 And how it falls behind the Sun,
according to the law of the stars, by
exactly five days in one period of time,
when it has completed the pathway you
have seen.
79.6 Such is the appearance, and
likeness, of every light, which Uriel, the
great Angel who is their leader, showed
to me.
80.1 And in those days Uriel
answered me and said to me: “Behold, I
have shown you everything, Oh Enoch.
And I have revealed everything to you,
so that you may see this Sun, and this
Moon, and those who lead the Stars of
Heaven, and all those who turn them,
their tasks and their times and their
rising.
80.2 But in the days of the sinners the
years will become shorter, and their
seed will be late on their land, and on
their fields. And all things on the earth
will change and will not appear at their
proper time. And the rain will be
withheld and Heaven will retain it.
80.3 And in those times the fruits of the
earth will be late, and will not grow at
their proper time, and the fruits of the
trees will be withheld at their proper
time.
80.4 And the Moon will change its
customary practice and will not appear
at its proper time.
80.5 But in those days it will appear in
Heaven, come on top of a large chariot
in the west, and shine with more than
normal brightness.
80.6 And many heads of the stars, in
command, will go astray. And these
will change their courses and their
activities and will not appear at the
times that have been prescribed for
them.
80.7 And the entire law of the stars will
be closed to the sinners, and the
thoughts of those who dwell upon the
Earth will go astray over them, and they
will turn from all their ways and will go
astray, and will think them gods.
80.8 And many evils will overtake them
and punishment will come upon them to
destroy them all.”
36
81.1 And he said to me: “Oh Enoch,
look at the book of the Tablets of
Heaven and read what is written upon
them, and note every individual fact.”
81.2 And I looked at everything that
was written and I noted everything.
And I read the book and everything that
was written in it, all the deeds of men,
and all the children of flesh who will be
upon the Earth, for all the generations of
eternity.
81.3 And then I immediately blessed the
Lord, the Eternal King of Glory, in that
he has made all the works of the world,
and I praised the Lord because of his
patience, and I blessed him on account
of the sons of Adam.
81.4 And at that time I said: “Blessed is
the man who dies righteous and good,
concerning whom no book of iniquity
has been written, and against whom no
guilt has been found.”
81.5 And these three Holy ones brought
me and set me on the earth in front of
the door of my house, and said to me:
“Tell everything to your son
Methuselah, and show all your children
that no flesh is righteous, before the
Lord, for He created them.
81.6 For one year we will leave you
with your children, until you have
regained your strength, so that you may
teach your children and write these
things down for them, and testify to all
your children. And in the second year
we will take you from amongst them.
81.7 Let your heart be strong, for the
good will proclaim righteousness to the
good, the righteous will rejoice with the
righteous and they will wish each other
well.
81.8 But the sinner will die with the
sinner and the apostate will sink with
the apostate.
81.9 And those who practice
righteousness will die because of the
deeds of men, and will be gathered in
because of the deeds of the impious.”
81.10 And in those days they finished
speaking to me and I went to my family
as I blessed the Lord of Ages.
82.1 And now, my son Methuselah,
all these things I recount to you, and
write down for you. I have revealed
everything to you, and have given you
books about all these things. Keep, my
son Methuselah, the books from the
hand of your father so that you may
pass them on to the generations of
eternity.
82.2 I have given wisdom to you, and to
your children, and to those who will be
your children, that they may give it to
their children, for all the generations,
forever, this wisdom that is beyond their
thoughts.
82.3 And those who understand it will
not sleep, but will incline their ears that
they may learn this wisdom, and it will
be better for those who eat from it than
good food.
82.4 Blessed are all the righteous,
blessed are all those who walk in the
way of righteousness and do not sin like
the sinners.
In the numbering of all their days in
which the Sun journeys in Heaven,
coming in and out, through the Gates of
Heaven, for thirty days.
With the leaders of the thousands, of
this order of stars, and with the four
which are added, and divided between
the four seasons of the year, which lead
them and appear with them on four
days.
82.5 Because of them men go wrong,
and they do not reckon them in the
reckoning of the whole year; for men go
wrong in respect of them and do not
know them exactly.
82.6 For they belong in the reckoning of
the year, and are truly recorded forever,
one in the first Gate, and one in the
third, and one in the fourth and one in
the sixth. And the year is completed in
364 days.
37
82.7 And the account of it is true, and
the recorded reckoning of it is exact, for
the lights, and the months, and the
feasts, and the years, and the days.
Uriel showed me, and inspired me; he to
whom the Lord of the whole created
world gave commands about the Host of
Heaven for me.
82.8 And he has power in Heaven, over
night and day, to cause light to shine on
men; the Sun, the Moon, and the stars,
and all the Powers of Heaven, which
rotate in their orbits.
82.9 And this is the Law of the Stars,
which set in their places, at their times,
and at their feasts, and in their months.
82.10 And these are the names of those
who lead them, who keep watch, so that
they appear at their times, and in their
orders, and in their months, and in their
periods of rule, and in their positions.
82.11 Their four leaders, who divide the
four parts of the year, appear first; and
after them the twelve leaders of the
orders, who divide the months and the
years into 364 days, with the heads over
thousands, who separate the days. And
for the four days, that are added to
them, there are the leaders who separate
the four parts of the year.
82.12 And as for these heads over
thousands, one is added between the
leader and the led, but their leaders
make the separation.
82.13 And these are the names of the
leaders who separate the four appointed
parts of the year: Melkiel, Helemmelek,
Meleyal, and Narel.
82.14 And the names of those whom
they lead: Adnarel, Iyasusael, Iylumiel;
these three follow behind the leaders of
the orders. And all others follow behind
the three leaders of the orders, who
follow behind those leaders of positions,
who separate the four parts of the year.
82.15 In the beginning of the year,
Melkiel rises first and rules, who is
called the southern Sun - and all the
days of his period, during which he
rules, are ninety-one.
82.16 And these are the signs of the
days that are to be seen on the earth, in
the days of his period of rule; sweat, and
heat, and calm. And all the trees bear
fruit, and leaves appear on all the trees,
and the wheat harvest, and rose flowers.
And all the flowers bloom in the field
but the trees of winter are withered.
82.17 And these are the names of the
leaders who are under them: Berkeel,
Zelebsael, and another one who is
added, a head over a thousand, named
Heloyaseph. And the days of the period
of rule, of this one, are complete.
82.18 The second leader, after him, is
Helemmelec, whom they call the
Shining Sun; and all the days of his
light are ninety-one.
82.19 And these are the signs of the
days on earth: heat, and drought. And
the trees bring their fruit to ripeness and
maturity and make their fruit dry. And
the sheep mate and become pregnant.
And men gather all the fruits of the
earth, and everything that is in the
fields, and the vats of wine. And these
things occur in the days of his period of
rule.
82.20 And these are the names, and the
orders, and the leaders of these heads
over thousands: Gedaeyal, Keel, and
Heel. And the name of the head-over-athousand, who is added to them, is
Asfael. And the days of his period of
rule are complete.
Section IV. Chapters LXXXIIIXC.
The Dream-Visions.
83.1 And now, my son Methuselah, I
will show you all the visions that I saw,
recounting them before you.
83.2 Two visions I saw, before I took a
wife, and neither one was like the other.
For the first time, when I learnt the art
of writing, and for the second time,
38
before I took your mother. I saw a
terrible vision and concerning this I
made supplication to the Lord.
83.3 I had lain down in the house of my
grandfather, Malalel, when I saw in a
vision how Heaven was thrown down,
and removed, and it fell upon the Earth.
83.4 And when it fell upon the Earth, I
saw how the earth was swallowed up in
a great abyss, and mountains were
suspended on mountains, and hills sank
down upon hills, and tall trees were torn
up by their roots, and were thrown
down, and sank into the abyss.
83.5 And then speech fell into my
mouth, and I raised my voice to cry out,
and said: “The earth is destroyed!”
83.6 And my grandfather, Malalel,
roused me, since I lay near him, and
said to me: “Why did you cry out so,
my son, and why do you moan so?”
83.7 And I recounted to him the whole
vision, which I had seen, and he said to
me: “A terrible thing you have seen,
my son! Your dream vision concerns
the secrets of all the sin of the Earth; it
is about to sink into the abyss and be
utterly destroyed.
83.8 And now, my son, rise and make
supplication to the Lord of Glory, for
you are faithful, that a remnant may be
left on the Earth and that he may not
wipe out the whole Earth.
83.9 My son, from Heaven all this will
come upon the Earth, and upon the
Earth there will be great destruction.”
83.10 And then I rose and prayed, and
made supplication, and wrote my prayer
down for the generations of eternity,
and I will show everything to you my
son Methuselah.
83.11 And, when I went out below and
saw the sky, and the Sun rising in the
east, and the Moon setting in the west,
and some stars, and the whole Earth,
and everything as He knew it since the
beginning. Then I blessed the Lord of
Judgment and ascribed Majesty to him,
for he makes the Sun come out from the
windows of the east, so that it ascends
and rises on the face of Heaven, and
follows the path which has been shown
to it.
84.1 And I raised my hands in
righteousness and I blessed the Holy
and Great One. And I spoke with the
breath of my mouth, and with the
tongue of flesh, which God has made
for men born of flesh so that they might
speak with it; and he has given them
breath, and a tongue, and a mouth, so
that they might speak with them.
84.2 “Blessed are you, Oh Lord King,
and great and powerful in your majesty,
Lord of the whole Creation of Heaven,
King of Kings, and God of the whole
world! And your kingly authority, and
your Sovereignty and your Majesty will
last forever, and forever and ever, and
your power, for all generations. And all
the Heavens are your throne, forever,
and the whole Earth your footstool
forever, and ever and ever.
84.3 For you made, and you rule,
everything, and nothing is too hard for
you, and no wisdom escapes you; it
does not turn away from your throne
nor from your presence. And you
know, and see, and hear, everything,
and nothing is hidden from you, for you
see everything.
84.4 And now the Angels of your
Heaven are doing wrong and your anger
rests upon the flesh of men until the day
of the great judgment.
84.5 And now, Oh God, Lord, and
Great King, I entreat and ask that you
will fulfill my prayer to leave me a
posterity on Earth and not to wipe out
all the flesh of men and make the earth
empty so that there is destruction
forever.
84.6 And now, my Lord, wipe out from
the earth the flesh that has provoked
your anger, but the flesh of
righteousness and uprightness establish
as a seed bearing plant forever. And do
not hide your face from the prayer of
your servant, Oh Lord.”
39
85.1 And after this I saw another
dream, and I will show it all to you, my
son.
85.2 And Enoch raised his voice and
said to his son Methuselah: “To you I
speak, my son. Hear my words, and
incline your ear to the dream vision of
your father.
85.3 Before I took your mother, Edna, I
saw a vision on my bed: - and behold - a
bull came out of the earth, and that bull
was white.
And, after it, a heifer came out, and with
the heifer came two bullocks, and one
of them was black and the other red.
85.4 And that black bullock struck the
red one, and pursued it over the earth,
and from then on I could not see that red
bullock.
85.5 But that black bullock grew, and a
heifer went with it; and I saw that many
bulls came out from it, which were like
it, and followed behind it.
85.6 And that cow, that first one, came
from the presence of that first bull,
seeking that red bullock, but did not
find it. And then it moaned bitterly and
continued to seek it.
85.7 And I looked until that first bull
came to it, and calmed it, and from that
time it did not cry out.
85.8 And after this, she bore another
white bull, and after this she bore many
black bulls and cows.
85.9 And I saw, in my sleep, that white
bull, how it likewise grew and became a
large white bull. And from it came
many white bulls, and they were like it.
85.10 And they began to beget many
white bulls that were like them - one
following another.
86.1 And again, I looked with my
eyes as I was sleeping, and I saw
Heaven above, and behold, a star fell
from Heaven, and it arose and ate and
pastured amongst those bulls.
86.2 And, after this, I saw the large and
the black bulls, and behold, all of them
changed their pens, and their pastures,
and their heifers. And they began to
moan, one after another.
86.3 And, again, I saw in the vision and
looked up at Heaven, and behold, I saw
many stars, how they came down, and
were thrown down from Heaven to that
first star, and fell amongst those heifers
and bulls. They were with them
pasturing amongst them.
86.4 And I looked at them and saw, and
behold, all of them let out their private
parts, like horses, and began to mount
the cows of the bulls. And they all
became pregnant and bore elephants,
camels, and asses.
86.5 And all the bulls were afraid of
them, and were terrified in front of
them. And they began to bite with their
teeth, and to devour, and to gore with
their horns.
86.6 And so they began to devour those
bulls, and behold, all the sons of the
Earth began to tremble and shake before
them and to flee.
87.1 And again I saw them, how
they began to gore one another, and to
devour one another, and the Earth began
to cry out.
87.2 And I raised my eyes again to
Heaven, and saw in the vision, and
behold, there came from Heaven beings
that were like white men. And four
came from that place, and three others
with them.
87.3 And those three, who came out
last, took hold of me by my hand and
raised me from the generations of the
Earth, and lifted me up onto a high
place, and showed me a tower high
above the earth, and all the hills were
lower.
87.4 And one said to me: “Remain here
until you have seen everything which is
coming upon these elephants, and
camels, and asses, and upon the stars,
and upon all the bulls.”
40
88.1 And I saw one of those four
who had come out first, how he took
hold of that first star, which had fallen
from Heaven, and bound it by its hands
and feet, and threw it into an abyss.
And that abyss was narrow, and deep,
and horrible, and dark.
88.2 And one of them drew his sword,
and gave it to those elephants, camels,
and asses; and they began to strike one
another, and the whole Earth shook
because of them.
88.3 And as I looked in the vision,
behold, one of those four who had come
out cast a line from Heaven and
gathered and took all the large stars;
those whose private parts were like the
private parts of horses, and bound them
all by their hands and their feet, and
threw them into a chasm of the Earth.
89.1 And one of those four, went to
a white bull, and taught him a mystery,
trembling as he was. He was born a
bull, but became a man, and built for
himself a large vessel, and dwelt on it,
and three bulls went with him in that
vessel, and they were covered over.
89.2 And, again, I raised my eyes to
Heaven and saw a high roof with seven
water channels on it, and those channels
discharged much water into an
enclosure.
89.3 And I looked again, and behold,
springs opened on the floor of that large
enclosure, and water began to bubble
up, and to rise above the floor. And I
looked at that enclosure until its whole
floor was covered by water.
89.4 And water, darkness, and mist
increased on it, and I looked at the
height of that water, and that water had
risen above that enclosure and was
pouring out over the enclosure, and it
remained on the earth.
89.5 And all the bulls of that enclosure
were gathered together, until I saw how
they sank, and were swallowed up, and
destroyed, in that water.
89.6 And that vessel floated on the
water, but all the bulls, elephants,
camels, and asses sank to the bottom,
together with all the animals, so that I
could not see them. And they were
unable to get out, but were destroyed,
and sank into the depths.
89.7 And, again, I looked at that vision
until those water channels were
removed from that high roof, and the
chasms of the Earth were made level,
and other abysses were opened.
89.8 And the water began to run down
into them, until the earth became
visible, and that vessel settled on the
earth and the darkness departed, and
light appeared.
89.9 And that white bull, who became a
man, went out from that vessel, and the
three bulls with him. And one of the
three bulls was white, like that bull, and
one of them was red as blood, and one
was black. And that white bull passed
away from them.
89.10 And they began to beget wild
animals and birds, so that there arose
from them every kind of species: lions,
tigers, wolves, dogs, hyenas, wildboars, foxes, badgers, pigs, falcons,
vultures, kites, eagles, and ravens. But
amongst them was born a white bull.
89.11 And they began to bite one
another but that white bull, which was
born amongst them, begat a wild ass
and a white bull with it, and the wild
asses increased.
89.12 But that bull, which was born
from it, begat a black wild boar and a
white sheep, and that wild-boar begat
many boars and that sheep begat twelve
sheep.
89.13 And when those twelve sheep had
grown, they handed one of their number
over to the asses, and those in turn,
handed that sheep over to the wolves;
and that sheep grew up amongst the
wolves.
89.14 And the Lord brought the eleven
sheep to dwell with it, and to pasture
41
with it amongst the wolves, and they
increased and became many flocks of
sheep.
89.15 And the wolves began to make
them afraid, and they oppressed them
until they made away with their young,
and then they threw their young into a
river with much water; but those sheep
began to cry out because of their young,
and to complain to their Lord.
89.16 But a sheep, which had been
saved from the wolves, fled and escaped
to the wild asses. And I saw the sheep
moaning and crying out, and petitioning
the Lord with all their power, until that
Lord of the sheep came down at the call
of the sheep, from a high room, and
came to them, and looked at them.
89.17 And he called that sheep, which
had fled from the wolves, and spoke to
it about the wolves, that it should warn
them that they should not touch the
sheep.
89.18 And the sheep went to the
wolves, in accordance with the Word of
the Lord, and another sheep met that
sheep and went with it. And the two of
them together, entered the assembly of
those wolves, spoke to them, and
warned them that from then on, they
should not touch those sheep.
89.19 And after this, I saw the wolves,
how they acted even more harshly
towards the sheep, with all their power,
and the sheep called out.
89.20 And their Lord came to the sheep
and began to beat those wolves; and the
wolves began to moan, but the sheep
became silent and from then on they did
not cry out.
89.21 And I looked at the sheep until
they escaped from the wolves; but the
eyes of the wolves were blinded, and
those wolves went out in pursuit of the
sheep with all their forces.
89.22 And the Lord of the sheep went
with them, as he led them, and all his
sheep followed him; and his face was
glorious, and his appearance terrible and
magnificent.
89.23 But the wolves began to pursue
those sheep until they met them by a
stretch of water.
89.24 And that stretch of water was
divided, and the water stood on one
side, and on the other, before them.
And their Lord as he led them, stood
between them and the wolves.
89.25 And while those wolves had not
yet seen the sheep, they went into the
middle of that stretch of water; but the
wolves pursued the sheep, and those
wolves ran after them into that stretch of
water.
89.26 But when they saw the Lord of
the sheep they turned to flee in front of
him; but that stretch of water flowed
together again, and suddenly resumed
its natural form, and the water swelled
up, and rose until it covered those
wolves.
89.27 And I looked until all the wolves
that had pursued those sheep were
destroyed and drowned.
89.28 But the sheep escaped that water,
and went to a desert, where there was
neither water, nor grass. And they
began to open their eyes and see, and I
saw the Lord of the sheep pasturing
them, and giving them water and grass,
and that sheep going and leading them.
89.29 And that sheep went up to the
summit of a high rock and the Lord of
the sheep sent it to them.
89.30 And after this, I saw the Lord of
the sheep standing before them, and his
appearance was terrible and majestic,
and all those sheep saw him and were
afraid of him.
89.31 And all of them were afraid and
trembled before him; and they cried out
to that sheep, with those who were in
their midst: “We cannot stand before
our Lord nor look at him.”
89.32 And that sheep, which led them,
again went up to the summit of that
rock; and the sheep began to be blinded,
and go astray from the path which had
been shown to them, but that sheep did
not know.
42
89.33 And the Lord of the sheep was
extremely angry with them, and that
sheep knew, and went down from the
summit of the rock, and came to the
sheep, and found the majority of them,
with their eyes blinded, and going
astray from his path.
89.34 And when they saw it they were
afraid and trembled before it and wished
that they could return to their enclosure.
And that sheep took some other sheep
with it, and went to those sheep that had
gone astray, and then began to kill
them; and the sheep were afraid of it.
And that sheep brought back those
sheep that had gone astray, and they
returned to their enclosures.
89.36 And I looked there at the vision,
until that sheep became a man, and built
a house for the Lord of the sheep, and
made all the sheep stand in that house.
89.37 And I looked until that sheep,
which had met that sheep that led the
sheep, fell asleep. And I looked until all
the large sheep were destroyed and
small ones arose in their place, and they
came to a pasture, and drew near a river
of water.
89.38 And that sheep that led them,
which had become a man, separated
from them and fell asleep, and all the
sheep sought it, and cried out very
bitterly over it.
89.39 And I looked until they left off
crying for that sheep, and crossed that
river of water. And there arose all the
sheep that led them, in place of those
which had fallen asleep; and they led.
89.40 And I looked until the sheep came
to a good place and a pleasant and
glorious land, and I looked until those
sheep were satisfied. And that house
was in the middle of them in that green
and pleasant land.
89.41 And sometimes their eyes were
opened, and sometimes blinded, until
another sheep rose up, led them, and
brought them all back. And their eyes
were opened.
89.42 And the dogs, and the foxes, and
the wild boars, began to devour those
sheep until the Lord of the sheep raised
up a ram from among them, which led
them.
89.43 And that ram began to butt those
dogs, foxes, and wild boars, on one side
and on the other until it had destroyed
them all.
89.44 And the eyes of that sheep were
opened, and it saw that ram in the
middle of the sheep, how it renounced
its glory, and began to butt those sheep,
and how it trampled on them and
behaved unbecomingly.
89.45 And the Lord of the sheep sent
the sheep to another sheep and raised it
up to be a ram and to lead the sheep in
place of that sheep which had
renounced its glory.
89.46 And it went to it, and spoke with
it alone, and raised up that ram, and
made it the prince and leader of the
sheep. And, during all this, those dogs
oppressed the sheep.
89.47 And the first ram pursued that
second ram and that second ram rose
and fled before it. And I looked until
those dogs made the first ram fall.
89.48 And that second ram rose up and
led the small sheep, and that ram begat
many sheep, and fell asleep. And a
small sheep became a ram, in place of
it, and became the prince and leader of
those sheep.
89.49 And those sheep grew and
increased; but all the dogs, and foxes,
and wild boars, were afraid and fled
from it. And that ram butted and killed
all the animals, and those animals did
not again prevail amongst the sheep,
and did not seize anything further from
them.
89.50 And that house became large and
broad, and for those sheep a high tower
was built on that house for the Lord of
the sheep. And that house was low but
the tower was raised up and high. And
the Lord of the sheep stood on that
tower and they spread a full table before
him.
43
89.51 And I saw those sheep again, how
they went astray, and walked in many
ways, and left that house of theirs; and
the Lord of the sheep called some of the
sheep, and sent them to the sheep, but
the sheep began to kill them.
89.52 But one of them was saved, and
was not killed, and it sprang away and
cried out against the sheep. And they
wished to kill it but the Lord of the
sheep saved it from the hands of the
sheep, brought it up to me, and made it
stay.
89.53 And he sent many other sheep to
those sheep, to testify to them and to
lament over them.
89.54 And after this, I saw how when
they left the house of the Lord of the
sheep, and his tower, they went astray in
everything, and their eyes were blinded.
And I saw how the Lord of the sheep
wrought much slaughter among them, in
their pastures, until those sheep invited
that slaughter, and betrayed his place.
89.55 And he gave them into the hands
of the lions, and the tigers, and the
wolves, and the hyenas, and into the
hands of the foxes, and to all the
animals. And those wild animals began
to tear those sheep in pieces.
89.56 And I saw how he left that house
of theirs, and their tower, and gave them
all into the hands of the lions so that
they might tear them in pieces and
devour them, and into the hands of all
the animals.
89.57 And I began to cry out with all
my power, to call the Lord of the sheep,
and to represent to him concerning the
sheep; that all the wild animals were
devouring them.
89.58 But he remained still, although he
saw, and he rejoiced that they were
devoured, swallowed up and carried off.
And he gave them into the hands of all
the animals for food.
89.59 And he called seventy shepherds,
and cast off those sheep, so that they
might pasture them. And he said to the
shepherds and to their companions:
“Each one of you, from now on, is to
pasture the sheep and do whatever I
command you.
89.60 And I will hand them over to you,
duly numbered, and I will tell you
which of them are to be destroyed, and
destroy them.” And he handed those
sheep over to them.
89.61 And he called another, and said to
him: “Observe and see everything that
these shepherds do against these sheep
for they will destroy from among them
more than I have commanded them.
89.62 And write down all the excess
and destruction, which is wrought by
the shepherds; how many they destroy
at my command and how many they
destroy of their own volition. Write
down against each shepherd,
individually, all that he destroys.
89.63 And read out in front of me
exactly how many they destroy of their
own volition and how many are handed
over for destruction so that this may be
a testimony for me against them. So
that I may know all the deeds of the
shepherds in order to hand them over
for judgment. And I will see what they
do, whether they abide by my command
with which I have commanded them, or
not.
89.64 But they must not know this, and
you must not show this to them, but
only write down against each individual
in his time all that the shepherds
destroy, and bring it all up to me.”
89.65 And I looked until those
shepherds pastured at their times, and
they began to kill and destroy more than
they were commanded, and they gave
those sheep into the hands of the lions.
89.66 And the lions and the tigers
devoured and swallowed up the
majority of those sheep, and the wild
boars devoured with them; and they
burnt down that tower and demolished
that house.
89.67 And I was extremely sad about
that tower because that house of the
sheep had been demolished; and after
44
that I was unable to see whether those
sheep went into that house.
89.68 And the shepherds and their
companions handed those sheep over to
all the animals so that they might
devour them. Each one of them, at his
time, received an exact number, and for
each of them, one after the other, there
was written in a book how many of
them were destroyed.
89.69 And each one killed and
destroyed more than was prescribed and
I began to weep and moan very much
because of those sheep.
89.70 And likewise, in the vision, I saw
that one who wrote, how each day, he
wrote down each one that was destroyed
by those shepherds. And he brought up,
and presented, the whole book to the
Lord of the sheep, everything they had
done and all that each one of them had
made away with, and all that they had
handed to destruction.
89.71 And the book was read out in
front of the Lord of the sheep, and he
took the book in his hand, read it, sealed
it, and put it down.
89.72 And after this I saw how the
shepherds pastured for twelve hours,
and behold three of those sheep
returned, and arrived, and came and
began to build up all that had fallen
down from that house; but the wild
boars hindered them so that they could
not.
89.73 And they again began to build, as
before, and they raised up that tower,
and it was called the high tower. And
they began again to place a table before
the tower but all the bread on it was
unclean and was not pure.
89.74 And, besides all this, the eyes of
these sheep were blinded so that they
could not see, and their shepherds
likewise. And they handed yet more of
them over to destruction, and they
trampled on the sheep with their feet,
and devoured them.
89.75 But the Lord of the sheep
remained still, until all the sheep were
scattered abroad, and had mixed with
them, and they did not save them from
the hands of the animals.
89.76 And that one who wrote the book
brought it up, showed it, and read it out
in the dwelling of the Lord of the sheep.
And he entreated Him on behalf of
them, and petitioned Him, as he showed
Him all the deeds of their shepherds and
testified in front of Him against all the
shepherds.
89.77 And he took the book, put it down
by Him, and went out.
90.1 And I looked until the time that
thirty-five shepherds had pastured the
sheep the same way, and, each
individually; they all completed their
time like the first ones. And others
received them into their hands to
pasture them, at their time, each
shepherd at his own time.
90.2 And after this, I saw in the vision,
all the birds of the sky coming: - The
eagles, the vultures, and the kites, and
the ravens. But the eagles led all the
birds, and they began to devour those
sheep, to peck out their eyes, and to
devour their flesh.
90.3 And the sheep cried out because
the birds devoured their flesh. And I
cried out and lamented in my sleep
because of that shepherd who pastured
the sheep.
90.4 And I looked until those sheep
were devoured by those dogs, and by
the eagles, and by the kites, and they
left them neither flesh nor skin, nor
sinew, until only their bones remained.
And their bones fell upon the ground
and the sheep became few.
90.5 And I looked until the time that
twenty-three shepherds had pastured,
and they completed, each in his time,
fifty eight times.
90.6 And small lambs were born from
those white sheep, and they began to
open their eyes, to see, and to cry to the
sheep.
90.7 But the sheep did not cry to them,
45
and did not listen to what they said to
them, but were extremely deaf, and their
eyes were extremely and excessively
blinded.
90.8 And I saw in the vision, how the
ravens flew upon those lambs, and took
one of those lambs, and dashed the
sheep in pieces and devoured them.
90.9 And I looked until horns came up
on those lambs but the ravens cast their
horns down. And I looked until a big
horn grew on one of those sheep, and
their eyes were opened.
90.10 And it looked at them and their
eyes were opened. And it cried to the
sheep, and the rams saw it, and they all
ran to it.
90.11 And, besides all this, those eagles,
and vultures, and ravens, and kites, were
still continually tearing the sheep in
pieces, and flying upon them and
devouring them. And the sheep were
silent but the rams lamented and cried
out.
90.12 And those ravens battled and
fought with it, and wished to make
away with its horn, but they did not
prevail against it.
90.13 And I looked at them until the
shepherds and the eagles, and those
vultures, and kites, came and cried to
the ravens that they should dash the
horn of that ram in pieces. And they
fought and battled with it, and it fought
with them and cried out so that its help
might come to it.
90.14 And I looked until that man, who
wrote down the names of the shepherds
and brought them up before the Lord of
the sheep, came, and he helped that ram
and showed it everything; its help was
coming down.
90.15 And I looked until that Lord of
the sheep came to them in anger, all
those who saw him fled, and they all
fell into the shadow in front of Him.
90.16 All the eagles and vultures and
ravens and kites, gathered together and
brought with them all the wild sheep,
and they all came together and helped
one another in order to dash that horn of
the ram in pieces.
90.17 And I looked at that man, who
wrote the book at the command of the
Lord, until he opened that book of the
destruction that those last twelve
shepherds had wrought. And he
showed, in front of the Lord of the
sheep, that they had destroyed even
more than those before them had.
90.18 And I looked until the Lord of the
sheep came to them and took the Staff
of His Anger and struck the Earth. And
the Earth was split. And all the animals,
and the birds of the sky, fell from those
sheep and sank in the earth; and it
closed over them.
90.19 And I looked until a big sword
was given to the sheep. And the sheep
went out against all the wild animals to
kill them. And all the animals, and
birds of the sky, fled before them.
90.20 And I looked until a throne was
set up in a pleasant land and the Lord of
the sheep sat on it. And they took all
the sealed books and opened the books
in front of the Lord of the sheep.
90.21 And the Lord called those men,
the seven first white ones, and
commanded them to bring in front of
Him the first star, which went before
those stars whose private parts were like
horses, and they brought them all in
front of Him.
90.22 And He said to that man who
wrote in front of Him, who was one of
the seven white ones, He said to him:
“Take those seventy shepherds, to
whom I handed over the sheep, and
who, on their own authority, took and
killed more than I commanded them.”
90.23 And behold, I saw them all
bound, and they all stood in front of
Him.
90.24 And the judgment was held, first
on the stars, and they were judged and
found guilty, and they went to the place
of damnation, and were thrown into a
deep place full of fire burning, and full
of pillars of fire.
46
90.25 And those seventy shepherds
were judged, and found guilty, and they
also were thrown into that abyss of fire.
90.26 And I saw at that time, how a
similar abyss was opened in the middle
of the Earth which was full of fire, and
they brought those blind sheep and they
were all judged, and found guilty, and
thrown into that abyss of fire and they
burned. And that abyss was on the
south of that house.
90.27 And I saw those sheep burning
and their bones were burning.
90.28 And I stood up to look until he
folded up that old house, and they
removed all the pillars, and all the
beams and ornaments of that house
were folded up with it. And they
removed it and put it in a place in the
south of the land.
90.29 And I looked until the Lord of the
sheep brought a new house, larger and
higher than the first one, and he set it up
on the site of the first one that had been
folded up. And all its pillars were new,
and its ornaments were new and larger
than those of the first one - the old one
that had been removed. And the Lord
of the sheep was in the middle of it.
90.30 And I saw all the sheep that were
left, and all the animals of the earth, and
all the birds of the sky, falling down and
worshipping those sheep, and entreating
them and obeying them in every
command.
90.31 And after this, those three who
were dressed in white and had taken
hold of my hand, the ones who had
brought me up at first. They, with the
hand of that ram also holding me, took
me up, and put me down in the middle
of those sheep before the judgment was
held.
90.32 And those sheep were all white
and their wool thick and pure.
90.33 And all those which had been
destroyed and scattered, and all the wild
animals, and all the birds of the sky,
gathered together in that house, and the
Lord of the sheep rejoiced very much
because they were all good, and had
returned to His house.
90.34 And I looked until they had laid
down that sword, which had been given
to the sheep, and they brought it back
into his house, and it was sealed in front
of the Lord. And all the sheep were
enclosed in that house but it did not
hold them.
90.35 And the eyes of all of them were
opened, and they saw well, and there
was not one among them that did not
see.
90.36 And I saw that that house was
large, broad, and exceptionally full.
90.37 And I saw how a white bull was
born, and its horns were big, and all the
wild animals, and all the birds of the
sky, were afraid of it, and entreated it
continually.
90.38 And I looked until all their
species were transformed and they all
became white bulls. And the first
among them was a wild-ox. And that
wild-ox was a large animal and had big
black horns on its head. And the Lord
of the sheep rejoiced over them, and
over all the bulls.
90.39 And I was asleep in the middle of
them and I woke up and saw everything.
90.40 And this is the vision which I saw
while I was asleep, and I woke up,
blessed the Lord of Righteousness, and
ascribed glory to him.
90.41 But after this I wept bitterly and
my tears did not stop until I could not
endure it. When I looked, they ran
down, because of what I saw, for
everything will come to pass and be
fulfilled, and all the deeds of men, in
their order, were shown to me.
90.42 That night I remembered my first
dream, and because of it I wept, and
was disturbed, because I had seen that
vision.
Section V. XCI-CIV
A Book of Exhortation and
Promised Blessing for the
47
Righteous and of Malediction
and Woe for the Sinners.
91.1 And now my son Methuselah,
call to me all your brothers, and gather
to me all the children of your mother.
For a voice calls me, and a spirit has
been poured over me, so that I may
show you everything that will come
upon you forever.
91.2 And after this Methuselah went
and called his brothers to him and
gathered his relations.
91.3 And he spoke about righteousness
to all his sons, and said:
“Hear, my children, all the words of
your father, and listen properly to the
voice of my mouth, for I will testify and
speak to you - my beloved. Love
uprightness and walk in it!
91.4 And do not draw near to
uprightness with a double heart, and do
not associate with those of a double
heart, but walk in righteousness my
children and it will lead you in good
paths, and righteousness will be your
companion.
91.5 For I know that the state of
wrongdoing will continue on Earth, and
a great punishment will be carried out
on the Earth, and an end will be made of
all iniquity. And it will be cut off at its
roots and its whole edifice will pass
away.
91.6 And iniquity will again be
complete on the Earth, and all the deeds
of iniquity, and the deeds of wrong, and
of wickedness, will prevail for a second
time.”
91.7 And when iniquity, and sin, and
blasphemy, and wrong, and all kinds of
evil deeds increase, and when apostasy,
wickedness, and uncleanness increase, a
great punishment will come from
Heaven upon all these. And the Holy
Lord will come in anger, and in wrath,
to execute judgment on the Earth.
91.8 In those days wrongdoing will be
cut off at its roots, and the roots of
iniquity, together with deceit, will be
destroyed from under Heaven.
91.9 And all the idols of the nations will
be given up, their towers will be burnt
in fire, and they will remove them from
the whole Earth. And they will be
thrown down into the Judgment of Fire,
and will be destroyed in anger, and in
the severe judgment that is forever.
91.10 And the righteous will rise from
sleep, and wisdom will rise, and will be
given to them.
91.11 And after this the roots of iniquity
will be cut off and the sword will
destroy the sinners. The blasphemers
will be cut off; in every place
blasphemy will be destroyed by the
sword.
91.12 And after this there will be
another week; the eighth, that of
righteousness, and a sword will be
given to it so that the Righteous
Judgment may be executed on those
who do wrong, and the sinners will be
handed over into the hands of the
righteous.
91.13 And, at its end, they will acquire
Houses because of their righteousness,
and a House will be built for the Great
King in Glory, forever.
91.14 And after this, in the ninth week,
the Righteous Judgment will be
revealed to the whole world. And all
the deeds of the impious will vanish
from the whole Earth. And the world
will be written down for destruction and
all men will look to the Path of
Uprightness.
91.15 And, after this, in the tenth week,
in the seventh part, there will be an
Eternal Judgment that will be executed
on the Watchers and the Great Eternal
Heaven that will spring from the midst
of the Angels.
91.16 And the First Heaven will vanish
and pass away and a New Heaven will
appear, and all the Powers of Heaven
will shine forever, with sevenfold light.
48
91.17 And after this, there will be many
weeks without number, forever, in
goodness and in righteousness. And
from then on sin will never again be
mentioned.
91.18 And now I tell you, my children,
and show you the paths of
righteousness, and the paths of
wrongdoing. And I will show you again
so that you may know what is to come.
91.19 And now listen, my children,
walk in the paths of righteousness and
do not walk in the paths of wrongdoing,
for all those who walk in the path of
iniquity will be destroyed forever.
92.1 Written by Enoch-the-Scribe,
this complete wisdom and teaching,
praised by all men and a judge of the
whole Earth.
For all my sons who dwell on Earth.
And for the last generations who will
practice justice and peace.
92.2 Let not your spirit be saddened by
the times for the Holy and Great One
has appointed days for all things.
92.3 And the righteous man will rise
from sleep, will rise and will walk in the
path of righteousness, and all his paths,
and his journeys, will be in eternal
goodness and mercy.
92.4 He will show mercy to the
righteous man and to him give eternal
uprightness, and to him give power.
And he will live in goodness, and
righteousness, and will walk in eternal
light.
92.5 And sin will be destroyed in
darkness, forever, and from that day
will never again be seen.
93.1 And, after this, Enoch began to
speak from the books:
93.2 And Enoch said: “Concerning the
sons of righteousness, and concerning
the chosen of the world, and concerning
the plant of righteousness and
uprightness, I will speak these things to
you, and make them known to you, my
children.
I, Enoch, according to that which
appeared to me in the Heavenly vision,
and that which I know from the words
of the Holy Angels, and understanding
from the Tablets of Heaven.”
93.3 And Enoch then began to speak
from the books, and said: “I was born
the seventh, in the first week, while
justice and righteousness still lasted.
93.4 And, after me, in the second week,
great injustice will arise, and deceit will
have sprung up. And in it there will be
the First End, and in it, a man will be
saved. And after it has ended, iniquity
will grow, and He will make a law for
the sinners.
93.5 And after this in the third week, at
its end, a man will be chosen as the
Plant of Righteous Judgment, and after
him will come the Plant of
Righteousness, forever.
93.6 And after this, in the fourth week,
at its end, visions of the righteous and
Holy will be seen, and a Law for All
Generations, and an enclosure will be
made for them.
93.7 And after this, in the fifth week, at
its end, a House of Glory and
Sovereignty will be built forever.
93.8 And after this, in the sixth week,
all those who live in it will be blinded.
And the hearts of them all, lacking
wisdom, will sink into impiety. And in
it, a man will ascend, and at its end the
House of Sovereignty will be burnt with
fire. And in it the whole race of the
chosen root will be scattered.
93.9 And after this, in the seventh
week, an apostate generation will arise.
And many will be its deeds - but all its
deeds will be apostasy.
93.10 And at its end, the Chosen
Righteous, from the Eternal Plant of
Righteousness, will be chosen, to whom
will be given sevenfold teaching,
concerning his whole creation.
93.11 For is there any man who can
49
hear the voice of the Holy One and not
be disturbed? And who is there who
can think his thoughts? And who is
there who can look at all the works of
Heaven?
93.12 And how should there be anyone
who could understand the works of
Heaven, and see a soul, or a spirit, and
tell about it, or ascend and see all their
ends and comprehend them, or make
anything like them?
93.13 And is there any man who could
know the length and breadth of the
Earth? And to who has all its
measurements been shown?
93.14 Or is there any man who could
know the length of Heaven, and what is
its height, and on what is it fixed, and
how large is the number of stars, and
where do all the lights rest?
94.1 And now I say to you, my
children, love righteousness and walk in
it; for the paths of righteousness are
worthy of acceptance, but the paths of
iniquity will quickly be destroyed and
vanish.
94.2 And to certain men, from a future
generation, the paths of wrongdoing and
of death will be revealed; and they will
keep away from them and will not
follow them.
94.3 And now I say to you, the
righteous: do not walk in the wicked
path, or in wrongdoing, or in the paths
of death, and do not draw near to them
or you may be destroyed.
94.4 But seek, and choose for yourself,
righteousness, and a life that is pleasing
and walk in the paths of peace so that
you may live and prosper.
94.5 And hold my words firmly in the
thoughts of your heart, and do not let
them be erased from your heart, for I
know that sinners will tempt men to
debase wisdom, and no place will be
found for it, and temptation will in no
way decrease.
94.6 Woe to those who build iniquity
and found deceit for they will quickly
be thrown down and will not have
peace.
94.7 Woe to those who build their
houses with sin, for from their whole
foundation they will be thrown down,
and by the sword they shall fall, and
those who acquire gold and silver will
quickly be destroyed in the judgment.
94.8 Woe to you, you rich, for you have
trusted in your riches, but from your
riches you will depart for you did not
remember the Most High in the days of
your riches.
94.9 You have committed blasphemy,
and iniquity, and are ready for the days
of the outpouring of blood, and for the
day of darkness, and for the day of the
Great Judgment.
94.10 Thus I say, and make known to
you, that He who created you will throw
you down, and over your fall there will
be no mercy, but your creator will
rejoice at your destruction.
94.11 And your righteousness in those
days will be a reproach to the sinners
and to the impious.
95.1 Would that my eyes were a
rain-cloud, so that I might weep over
you, and pour out my tears like rain, so
that I might have rest from the sorrow
of my heart!
95.2 Who permitted you to practice
hatred and wickedness? May judgment
come upon you, the sinners!
95.3 Do not be afraid of the sinners, you
righteous, for the Lord will again
deliver them into your hands, so that
you may execute judgment on them as
you desire.
95.4 Woe to you who pronounce
anathema that you cannot remove..
Healing will be far from you because of
your sin.
95.5 Woe to you who repay your
neighbours with evil for you will be
repaid according to your deeds.
95.6 Woe to you, you lying witnesses,
and to those who weigh out iniquity, for
50
you will quickly be destroyed.
95.7 Woe to you, you sinners, because
you persecute the righteous, for you
yourselves will be handed over and
persecuted, you men of iniquity, and
their yoke will be heavy on you.
96.1 Be hopeful, you righteous, for
the sinners will quickly be destroyed
before you, and you will have power
over them, as you desire.
96.2 And in the day of the distress of
the sinners, your young will rise up, like
eagles, and your nest will be higher than
that of vultures. And you will go up,
and like badgers, enter the crevices of
the earth, and the clefts of the rock,
forever, before the lawless, but they will
groan and weep because of you, like
satyrs.
96.3 And do not be afraid you who have
suffered, for you will receive healing,
and a bright light will shine upon you,
and the Voice of Rest you will hear
from Heaven.
96.4 Woes to you, you sinners, for your
riches make you appear righteous, but
your hearts prove you to be sinners.
And this word will be a testimony
against you as a reminder of your evil
deeds.
96.5 Woe to you who devour the finest
of the wheat, and drink the best of the
water, and trample upon the humble
through your power.
96.6 Woe to you who drink water all the
time, for you will quickly be repaid, and
will become exhausted and dry for you
have left the spring of life.
96.7 Woe to you who commit iniquity,
and deceit, and blasphemy, it will be a
reminder of evil against you.
96.8 Woe to you, you powerful, who
through power oppress the righteous;
for the day of your destruction will
come.
In those days many good days will
come for the righteous in the day of
your judgment.
97.1 Believe, you righteous, that the
sinners will become an object of shame
and will be destroyed on the Day of
Judgment.
97.2 Be it known to you, sinners, that
the Most High remembers your
destruction and that the Angels rejoice
over your destruction.
97.3 What will you do, you sinners, and
where will you flee on that day of
judgment when you hear the sound of
prayer of the righteous?
97.4 But you will not be like them
against whom this word will be a
testimony:
“You have been associated with the
sinners.”
97.5 And in those days, the prayer of
the Holy will be in front of the Lord,
and for you will come the days of your
judgment.
97.6 And the words of your iniquity will
be read out before the Great and Holy
One, and your faces will blush with
shame, and every deed which is founded
upon iniquity will be rejected.
97.7 Woe to you, you sinners, who are
in the middle of the sea, or on dry
ground, their memory will be harmful to
you.
97.8 Woe to you who acquire silver and
gold, but not in righteousness, and say:
“We have become very rich and have
possessions, and have acquired
everything that we desired.
97.9 And now let us do what we
planned, for we have gathered silver and
filled our storehouses, and as many as
water are the servants of our houses.”
97.10 And like the water your life will
flow away, for your riches will not stay
with you, but will quickly go up from
you, for you acquired everything in
iniquity and you will be given over to a
great curse.
98.1 Now I swear to you, the wise,
and the foolish, that you will see many
51
things on the earth.
98.2 For you men will put on yourselves
more adornments than a woman, and
more coloured garments than a girl,
clothed in sovereignty, and in majesty,
and in power, and silver, and gold, and
purple, and honours, - and food will be
poured out like water.
98.3 Because of this they will have
neither knowledge nor wisdom. And
through this, they will be destroyed,
together with their possessions, and
with all their glory and their honour.
And in shame, and in slaughter, and in
great destitution, their spirits will be
thrown into the fiery furnace.
98.4 I swear to you, you sinners, that as
a mountain has not, and will not,
become a slave, nor a hill a woman's
maid, so sin was not sent on the Earth
but man, of himself, created it. And
those who commit it will be subject to a
great curse.
98.5 And barrenness has not been given
to a woman but because of the deeds of
her hand she dies without children.
98.6 I swear to you, you sinners, by the
Holy and Great One, that all your evil
deeds are revealed in Heaven and that
your wrongdoing is not covered or
hidden.
98.7 And do not think in your spirit nor
say in your heart, that you do not know,
or do not see, every sin is written down
every day in Heaven in front of the
Most High.
98.8 From now on, you know that all
your wrongdoing that you do will be
written down every day, until the day of
your judgment.
98.9 Woe to you, you fools, for you will
be destroyed through your folly. And
you do not listen to the wise and good
will not come upon you.
98.10 And now know that you are ready
for the day of destruction. And do not
hope that you will live, you sinners;
rather you will go and die, for you know
no ransom. You are ready for the Day
of the Great Judgment and for the day
of distress and great shame for your
spirits.
98.11 Woe to you, you stubborn of
heart who do evil and eat blood, from
where do you have good things to eat
and drink and to be satisfied? From all
the good things which our Lord the
Most High has placed in abundance on
the earth. Therefore you will not have
peace.
98.12 Woe to you who love deeds of
iniquity. Why do you hope for good for
yourselves? Know that you will be
given into the hands of the righteous,
and they will cut your throats and kill
you, and will not have mercy on you.
98.13 Woe to you who rejoice in the
distress of the righteous for graves will
not be dug for you.
98.14 Woe to you who declare the
words of the righteous empty for you
will have no hope of life.
98.15 Woe to you who write lying
words, and the words of the impious,
for they write their lies so that men may
hear and continue their folly. And they
will not have peace but will die a
sudden death.
99.1 Woe to you who do impious
deeds and praise and honour lying
words; you will be destroyed and will
not have a good life.
99.2 Woe to you who alter the words of
truth, and they distort the eternal law
and count themselves as being without
sin; they will be trampled underfoot on
the ground.
99.3 In those days make ready, you
righteous, to raise your prayers as a
reminder and lay them as a testimony
before the Angels, that they may lay the
sin of the sinners before the Most High
as a reminder.
99.4 In those days the nations will be
thrown into confusion and the races of
the nations will rise on the Day of
Destruction.
99.5 And in those days, those who are
in need will go out, seize their children,
52
and cast out their children. And their
offspring will slip from them, and they
will cast out their children while they
are still sucklings, and will not return to
them, and will not have mercy on their
beloved ones.
99.6 And again I swear to you, the
sinners, that sin is ready for the Day of
Unceasing Bloodshed.
99.7 And they worship stone, and some
carve images of gold and of silver, and
of wood and of clay. And some, with
no knowledge, worship unclean spirits
and demons, and every kind of error.
But no help will be obtained from them.
99.8 And they will sink into impiety
because of the folly of their hearts, and
their eyes will be blinded through the
fear of their hearts, and through the
vision of their ambitions.
99.9 Through these they will become
impious and fearful, for they do all their
deeds with lies, and worship stones, and
they will be destroyed at the same
moment.
99.10 And in those days, blessed are
those who accept the words of wisdom,
and understand them, and follow the
paths of the Most High, and walk in the
path of righteousness, and do not act
impiously with the impious, for they
will be saved.
99.11 Woe to you who extend evil to
your neighbours; for you will be killed
in Sheol.
99.12 Woe to you who lay foundations
of sin and deceit, and who cause
bitterness on the Earth, for because of
this an end will be made of them.
99.13 Woe to you who build your
houses with the toil of others, and all
their building materials are the sticks
and stones of sin; I say to you: “You
will not have peace.”
99.14 Woe to those who reject the
measure, and the eternal inheritance of
their fathers, and cause their souls to
follow error, for they will not have rest.
99.15 Woe to those who commit
iniquity, and help wrong, and kill their
neighbours, until the Day of the Great
Judgment; for he will throw down your
glory.
99.16 And you put evil into your hearts,
and rouse the spirit of his anger, so that
he may destroy you all with the sword.
And all the righteous and the Holy will
remember your sin.
100.1 And in those days, and in
one place, fathers and sons will strike
one another, and brothers will together
fall in death, until their blood flows as if
it were a stream.
100.2 For a man will not, in mercy,
withhold his hand from his sons, nor
from his son's sons, in order to kill
them. And the sinner will not withhold
his hand from his honoured brother
from dawn until the Sun sets they will
kill one another.
100.3 And the horse will walk up to its
chest in the blood of sinners and the
chariot will sink up to its height.
100.4 And in those days the Angels will
come down into the hidden places, and
gather together in one place all those
who have helped sin, and the Most High
will rise on that day to execute the Great
Judgment on all the sinners.
100.5 And he will set guards, from the
Holy Angels, over all the righteous and
Holy, and they will guard them like the
apple of an eye, until an end is made of
all evil and all sin. And even if the
righteous sleep a long sleep they have
nothing to fear.
100.6 And the wise men will see the
truth, and the sons of the Earth will
understand all the words of this book,
and they will know that their riches will
not be able to save them or overthrow
their sin.
100.7 Woe to you, you sinners, when
you afflict the righteous on the day of
severe trouble, and burn them with fire,
you will be repaid according to your
deeds.
100.8 Woe to you, you perverse of heart
who watch to devise evil; fear will come
53
upon you and there is no one who will
help you.
100.9 Woe to you, you sinners, for an
account of the words of your mouth,
and for an account of the deeds of your
hands that you have impiously done;
you will burn in blazing flames of fire.
100.10 And now know that the Angels
will inquire in Heaven into your deeds,
from the Sun and the Moon and the
Stars, into your sins, for on earth you
execute judgment on the righteous.
100.11 And all the clouds and mist and
dew and rain will testify against you, for
they will be withheld from you so that
they do not fall on you, and they will
think about your sins.
100.12 And now give gifts to the rain,
so that it may not be withheld from
falling on you, and so that the dew, if it
has accepted gold and silver from you,
may fall.
100.13 When the hoarfrost and snow,
with their cold, and all the snow-winds
with their torments fall on you. In those
days, you will not be able to stand
before them.
101.1 Contemplate Heaven, all you
sons of Heaven, and all the works of the
Most High, and fear him, and do not do
evil in front of Him.
101.2 If He closes the Windows of
Heaven, and withholds the rain and the
dew, so that it does not fall on the earth
because of you, what will you do?
101.3 And if he sends his anger upon
you, and upon all your deeds, will you
not entreat him? For you speak proud
and hard against his righteousness. And
you will not have peace.
101.4 And do you not see the captains
of the ships; how their ships are tossed
by the waves and rocked by the winds
and are in distress?
101.5 And because of this they are
afraid, for all their good possessions
that go out on the sea with them, and
they think nothing good in their hearts,
only that the sea will swallow them up,
and that they will be destroyed in it.
101.6 Is not all the sea, and all its
waters, and all its movement, the work
of the Most High, and did he not seal all
it’s doings and bind it all with sand?
101.7 And at his rebuke it dries up and
becomes afraid, and all its fish die, and
everything in it; but you sinners who are
on Earth do not fear him.
101.8 Did he not make Heaven, Earth,
and everything that is in them? And
who gave knowledge, and wisdom, to
all things that move on the ground and
in the sea?
101.9 And do not those captains of the
ships fear the sea?
Yet, sinners do not fear the Most High.
102.1 And in those days, if he
brings a fierce fire upon you, where will
you flee, and where will you be safe?
And when he utters his voice against
you will you not be terrified and afraid?
102.2 And all the Lights will shake with
great fear, and the whole Earth will be
terrified, and will tremble and quail.
102.3 And all the Angels will carry out
their commands, and will seek to hide
from the One who is Great in Glory,
and the children of the Earth will
tremble and shake; and you sinners will
be cursed forever and will not have
peace.
102.4 Do not be afraid you souls of the
righteous, and be hopeful, you who
have died in righteousness.
102.5 And do not be sad that your souls
have gone down into Sheol in sadness
and that your bodies did not obtain
during your life a reward in accordance
with your goodness.
102.6 But when you die the sinners will
say about you: “As we die, the
righteous have also died, and of what
use to them were their deeds?”
102.7 “Behold, like us they have died in
sadness and in darkness, and what
advantage do they have over us? From
now on we are equal.”
102.8 “And what will they receive and
54
what will they see forever? For behold,
they too have died, and from now on
they will never again see the light.”
102.9 And I say to you, you sinners:
“You are content to eat and drink, and
strip men naked, and steal, and sin, and
acquire possessions, and see good days.
102.10 But you saw the righteous, how
their end was peace, for no wrong was
found in them until the day of their
death.”
102.11 “But they were destroyed and
became as though they had not been and
their souls went down to Sheol in
distress.”
103.1 And now I swear to you, the
righteous, by His Great Glory and His
Honour, and by His Magnificent
Sovereignty, and by His Majesty: - I
swear to you that I understand this
mystery.
103.2 And I have read the Tablets of
Heaven and seen the writing of the Holy
Ones. And I found written and
engraved in it, concerning them, that all
good, and joy, and honour, have been
made ready, and written down, for the
spirits of those who died in
righteousness.
103.3 And much good will be given to
you in recompense for your toil and that
your lot will be more excellent than the
lot of the living.
103.4 And the spirits of you who have
died in righteousness will live, and your
spirits will rejoice and be glad, and the
memory of them will remain in front of
the Great One for all the generations of
eternity. Therefore do not fear their
abuse.
103.5 Woe to you, you sinners, when
you die in your sin, and those who are
like you say about you: “Blessed were
the sinners they saw their days.
103.6 And now they have died in
prosperity and wealth, distress and
slaughter they did not see during their
life, but they have died in glory, and
judgment was not executed on them in
their life.”
103.7 Know that their souls will be
made to go down into Sheol, they will
be wretched, and their distress will be
great.
103.8 And in darkness, and in chains,
and in burning flames, your spirits will
come to the Great Judgment. And the
Great Judgment will last for all
generations, forever. Woe to you for
you will not have peace.
103.9 Do not say, the righteous and the
good who were alive; “In the days of
our affliction we toiled laboriously, and
saw every affliction, and met many
evils. We were spent and became few
and our spirit small.
103.10 We were destroyed and there
was no one who helped us with words
or with deeds. We were powerless and
found nothing. We were tortured and
destroyed and did not expect to see life
from one day to the next.
103 11 We hoped to become the head
but became the tail. We toiled and
laboured, but were not masters of the
fruits of our toil; we became food for
the sinners, and the lawless made their
yoke heavy upon us.
103.12 Those who hated us, those who
goaded us, were masters of us. And to
those who hated us we bowed our necks
but they did not have mercy on us.
103.13 We sought to escape from them
so that we might flee and be at rest. But
we found no place where we might flee
and be safe from them.
103.14 We complained about them to
the rulers, in our distress, and cried out
against those who devoured us, but they
took no notice of our cries, and did not
wish to listen to our voice.
103.15 And they helped those who
plundered us and devoured us, and
those who made us few, and they
concealed their wrongdoing, and did not
remove from us the yoke of those who
devoured us, and scattered us, and killed
us. And they concealed our slaughter
and did not remember that they had
55
raised their hands against us.”
104.1 I swear to you, you
righteous, that in Heaven the Angels
remember you for good in front of the
Glory of the Great One, and that your
names are written down in front of the
Glory of the Great One.
104.2 Be hopeful! For you were
formerly put to shame through evils and
afflictions, but now you will shine like
the Lights of Heaven, and will be seen,
and the Gate of Heaven will be opened
to you.
104.3 And persevere in your cry for
judgment and it will appear to you, for
justice will be exacted from the rulers
for all your distress, and from all those
who helped those who plundered you.
104.4 Be hopeful, and do not abandon
your hope, for you will have great joy
like the Angels of Heaven.
104.5 What will you have to do? You
will not have to hide on the day of the
Great Judgment, nor will you be found
to be sinners. The Eternal Judgment
will be upon you for all the generations
of eternity.
104.6 And now do not be afraid, you
righteous, when you see the sinners
growing strong and prospering in their
desires, and do not be associated with
them but keep far away from their
wrongdoing, for you will be associates
of the Host of Heaven.
104.7 For you sinners say: “None of
our sins will be inquired into and
written down!” But they will write
down your sins every day.
104.8 And now I show you that light
and darkness, day and night, see all your
sins.
104.9 Do not be impious in your hearts,
and do not lie, and do not alter the
words of truth, nor say that the words of
the Holy and Great One are lies, and do
not praise your idols. For all your lies,
and all your impiety, lead not to
righteousness but to great sin.
104.10 And now I know this mystery;
that many sinners will alter and distort
the words of truth, and speak evil
words, and lie, and concoct great
fabrications, and write books in their
own words.
104.11 But when they write my words
exactly in their languages, and do not
alter or omit anything from my words,
but write everything exactly, everything
that I testified about before; then I know
another mystery:
104.12 That books will be given to the
righteous and wise and will be a source
of joy and truth and much wisdom.
104.13 And books will be given to
them, and they will believe in them and
rejoice over them; and all the righteous
who have learnt from them all the ways
of truth will be glad.
105.1 And in those days, says the
Lord, they shall call and testify to the
sons of the Earth about the wisdom in
them. Show it to them for you are their
leaders and the rewards will be over all
the Earth.
105.2 For my son and I will join
ourselves with them, forever, in the
paths of uprightness during their lives.
And you will have peace.
Rejoice - you sons of uprightness!
Amen
Fragment of the Book of Noah
106.1 And after those days my son
Methuselah chose a wife for his son
Lamech and she became pregnant by
him and bore a son.
106.2 And his body was white like
snow, and red like the flower of a rose,
and the hair of his head was white like
wool. And his eyes were beautiful and
when he opened his eyes he made the
whole house bright, like the Sun, so that
the whole house was exceptionally
bright.
106.3 And when he was taken from the
56
hand of the midwife he opened his
mouth and spoke to the Lord of
Righteousness.
106.4 And his father Lamech was afraid
of him, and fled, and went to his father
Methuselah.
106.5 And he said to him: "I have
begotten a strange son; he is not like a
man but is like the children of the
Angels of Heaven, of a different type
and not like us. And his eyes are like
the rays of the Sun and his face
glorious.
106.6 And it seems to me that he is not
sprung from me but from the Angels
and I am afraid that something
extraordinary may be done on the earth
in his days.
106.7 And now, my father, I am
entreating you and petitioning you, to
go to our father Enoch, and learn from
him the truth, for his dwelling is with
the Angels."
106.8 And when Methuselah heard the
words of his son he came to me, at the
ends of the Earth, for he had heard that I
was there. And he cried out, and I heard
his voice and went to him. And I said
to him: "Behold I am here my son, for
you have come to me."
106.9 And he answered me, and said:
"Because of a great matter I have come
to you, and because of a disturbing
vision, have I come near.
106.10 And now hear me, my father, for
a child has been born to my son
Lamech, whose form and type are not
like the type of a man. His colour is
whiter than snow, and redder than the
flower of the rose, and the hair of his
head is whiter than white wool. And his
eyes are like the rays of the Sun; and he
opened his eyes and made the whole
house bright.
106.11 And he was taken from the hand
of the midwife, and he opened his
mouth, and blessed the Lord of Heaven.
106.12 And his father Lamech was
afraid and fled to me. And he does not
believe he is sprung from him but thinks
him to be from the Angels of Heaven.
And behold, I have come to you, so that
you may make known to me the truth."
106.13 And I, Enoch, answered and said
to him: "The Lord will do new things
on Earth, and this I have already seen in
a vision, and made known to you. For
in the generation of my father, Jared,
some from the height of Heaven
transgressed the word of the Lord.
106.14 And behold, they commit sin
and transgress the law, and have been
promiscuous with women, and commit
sin with them, and have married some
of them, and have begotten children by
them.
106.15 And there will be great
destruction over the whole Earth, and
there will be a deluge, and there will be
great destruction for one year.
106.16 But this child, who has been
born to you, will be left on the Earth,
and his three sons will be saved with
him. When all the men who are on the
Earth die he and his sons will be saved.
106.17 They will beget on the Earth
giants, not of spirit, but of flesh, and
there will be great wrath on Earth, and
the Earth will be cleansed of all
corruption.
106.18 And now make known to your
son Lamech that the one who has been
born is truly his son. And call his name
Noah, for he will be a remnant for you
and he and his sons will be saved from
the destruction which is coming on the
earth because of all the sin and all the
iniquity, which will be committed on
the Earth in his days.
106.19 But after this, there will be yet
greater iniquity than that which was
committed on the earth before. For I
know the mysteries of the Holy Ones,
for the Lord showed them to me and
made them known to me, and I read
them in the Tablets of Heaven.
107.1 And I saw written on them,
that generation upon generation will do
wrong, until a generation of
57
righteousness shall arise, and
wrongdoing shall be destroyed, and sin
shall depart from the earth, and
everything good shall come upon it.
107.2 And now, my son, go, make
known to your son Lamech, that this
child that has been born, is truly his son,
and this is no lie.
107.3 And when Methuselah had heard
the words of his father Enoch - for he
showed him everything which is secret -
he returned, having seen him, and called
the name of that child Noah; for he will
comfort the Earth after all the
destruction.
108.1 Another book which Enoch
wrote for his son Methuselah and for
those who should come after him and
keep the law in the last days.
108.2 You who have observed, and are
waiting in these days, until an end shall
be made of those who do evil, and an
end shall be made of the power of the
wrongdoers.
108.3 Do indeed wait until sin shall pass
away, for their names shall be erased
from the Books of the Holy Ones, and
their offspring will be destroyed
forever. And their spirits will be killed,
and they will cry out and moan in a
chaotic desert place, and will burn in
fire, for there is no Earth there.
108.4 And there I saw something like a
cloud, which could not be discerned, for
because of its depth I was not able to
look into it. And the flames of a fire I
saw, burning brightly, and things like
bright mountains revolved and shook
from side to side.
108.5 And I asked one of the Holy
Angels, who were with me, and I said to
him: “What is this bright place? For
there is no sky, but only the flames of a
burning fire, and the sounds of crying,
and weeping, and moaning, and severe
pain.”
108.6 And he said to me: “This place
which you see; here will be thrown the
spirits of the sinners, and of the
blasphemers, and of those who do evil.
And of those who alter everything that
the Lord has spoken through the mouths
of the prophets about the things that
shall be done.
108.7 For there are books, and records,
about them in Heaven above so that the
Angels may read them and know what
is about to come upon the sinners. And
upon the spirits of the humble, and of
those who afflicted their bodies and
were recompensed by God, and of those
who were abused by evil men.
108.8 Those who loved God and did not
love gold, or silver, or any possessions,
but gave up their bodies to torment.
108.9 Those who, from the moment
they existed, did not desire earthly food,
but counted themselves as a breath
which passes away, and kept to this.
And the Lord tested them much, and
their spirits were found pure, so that
they might bless His Name.”
108.10 And all their blessings I have
recounted in the books, and he has
assigned them their reward, for they
were found to be such that they loved
Heaven more than their life in the
world. And although they were
trampled underfoot by evil men, and
had to listen to reviling and reproach
from them, and were abused, yet they
blessed their Lord.
108.11 And the Lord said: “And now I
will call the spirits of the good, who are
of the Generation of Light, and I will
transform those who were born in
darkness, who in the flesh were not
recompensed with honour as was fitting
to their faith.
108.12 And I will bring out into the
shining light those who love my Holy
Name and I will set each one on the
throne of his honour.”
108.13 And they will shine for times
without number, for righteous is the
Judgment of God, for with the faithful
He will keep faith in the dwelling of
upright paths.
58
108.14 And they will see those who
were born in darkness thrown into the
darkness while the righteous shine.
108.15 And the sinners will cry out as
they see them shining but they
themselves will go where days and
times have been written down for them.
59
The Book of the Secrets of Enoch
INTRODUCTION
The Second Book of Enoch (usually abbreviated 2 Enoch, and otherwise variously known as
Slavonic Enoch or The Secrets of Enoch) is a pseudepigraphic (a text whose claimed authorship
is unfounded) of the Old Testament. It is usually considered to be part of the Apocalyptic
literature. Late 1st century CE is the dating often preferred. The text has been preserved in full
only in Slavonic, but in 2009 it was announced that Coptic fragments of the book had been
identified. Greek is indicated as the language behind the Slavonic version[1]. It is not regarded as
scripture by Jews or any Christian group. It was rediscovered and published at the end of 19th
century.
Most scholars consider 2 Enoch to be composed by an unknown Jewish sectarian group, while
some authors think it is a 1st century Christian text[2][3]. A very few scholars consider it a later
Christian work[4]. This article discusses 2 Enoch. It is distinct from the Book of Enoch, known
as 1 Enoch. There is also an unrelated 3 Enoch. The numbering of these texts has been applied
by scholars to distinguish the texts from one another.
Dates ranging from the 1st century BC to the 10th century CE have been proposed, with the late
1st century CE often preferred. The date of the text can be deduced solely on the basis of the
internal evidence since the book has survived only in the medieval manuscripts (even if a
reference of 2 Enoch could be find in Origen's De Principis i, 3:3). Composition shall be later
than the Book of the Watchers in 1 Enoch (about III century BCE). The crucial arguments for the
early dating of the text have very largely been linked to the themes of the Temple in Jerusalem
and its ongoing practices and customs. Scholarly efforts have been in this respect mostly directed
toward finding hints that the Sanctuary was still standing when the original text was composed.
Scholars noted that the text gives no indication that the destruction of the Temple had already
occurred at the time of the book's composition. Critical readers of the pseudepigraphic would
have some difficulties finding any explicit expression of feelings of sadness or mourning about
the loss of the sanctuary.
Affirmations of the value of animal sacrifice and Enoch's halakhic instructions found in 2 Enoch
59 also appear to be fashioned not in the “preservationist,” mishnaic-like mode but rather as if
they reflected sacrificial practices that still existed when the author was writing his book. The
author tries legitimize the central place of worship, which through the reference to the place
Ahuzan, which is a cryptic name for a Jewish Temple.
Scholars have also previously noted in the text some indications of the ongoing practice of
pilgrimage to the central place of worship. These indications could be expected in a text written
in the Alexandrian Diaspora. Thus in his instructions to the children, Enoch repeatedly
encourages them to bring the gifts before the face of God for the remission of sins, a practice
which appears to recall well-known sacrificial customs widespread in the Second Temple period.
Further, the Slavonic apocalypse also contains a direct command to visit the Temple three times
a day, an inconsistency if the sanctuary had been already destroyed.
60
The
Book of the Secrets of Enoch
Also known as Slavonic Enoch or 2 Enoch
Translated from the Slavonic by W. R. Morfill, M.A.
1.1 There was a wise man, a great artificer,
and the Lord conceived love for him and
received him, that he should behold the
uppermost dwellings and be an eye-witness
of the wise and great and inconceivable and
immutable realm of God Almighty, of the
very wonderful and glorious and bright and
many-eyed station of the Lord’s servants,
and of the inaccessible throne of the Lord,
and of the degrees and manifestations of the
incorporeal hosts, and of the ineffable
ministration of the multitude of the
elements, and of the various apparition and
inexpressible singing of the host of
Cherubim, and of the boundless light.
2 At that time, he said, when my one
hundred and sixty-fifth year was completed,
I begat my son Mathusal (Methuselah).
3 After this too I lived two hundred years
and completed of all the years of my life
three hundred and sixty-five years.
4 On the first day of the month I was in my
house alone and was resting on my bed and
slept.
5 And when I was asleep, great distress
came up into my heart, and I was weeping
with my eyes in sleep, and I could not
understand what this distress was, or what
would happen to me.
6 And there appeared to me two men,
exceeding big, so that I never saw such on
earth; their faces were shining like the sun,
their eyes too (were) like a burning light,
and from their lips was fire coming forth
with clothing and singing of various kinds in
appearance purple, their wings brighter than
gold, their hands whiter than snow.
7 They were standing at the head of my bed
and began to call me by my name.
8 And I arose from my sleep and saw clearly
those two men standing in front of me.
9 And I saluted them and was seized with
fear and the appearance of my face was
changed from terror, and those men said to
me:
10 Have courage, Enoch, do not fear; the
eternal God sent us to you, and lo! You shalt
to-day ascend with us into heaven, and you
shall tell your sons and all your household
all that they shall do without you on earth in
your house, and let no one seek you till the
Lord return you to them.
11 And I made haste to obey them and went
out from my house, and made to the doors,
as it was ordered me, and summoned my
sons Mathusal (Methuselah) and Regim and
Gaidad and made known to them all the
marvels those (men) had told me.
2 1. Listen to me, my children, I know not
whither I go, or what will befall me; now
therefore, my children, I tell you: turn not
from God before the face of the vain, who
made not Heaven and earth, for these shall
perish and those who worship them, and
may the Lord make confident your hearts in
the fear of him. And now, my children, let
no one think to seek me, until the Lord
return me to you.
61
3.1 It came to pass, when Enoch had told
his sons, that the angels took him on to their
wings and bore him up on to the first heaven
and placed him on the clouds. And there I
looked, and again I looked higher, and saw
the ether, and they placed me on the first
heaven and showed me a very great Sea,
greater than the earthly sea.
4.1 They brought before my face the elders
and rulers of the stellar orders, and showed
me two hundred angels, who rule the stars
and (their) services to the heavens, and fly
with their wings and come round all those
who sail.
5.1 And here I looked down and saw the
treasure-houses of the snow, and the angels
who keep their terrible store-houses, and the
clouds whence they come out and into
which they go.
6.1 They showed me the treasure-house of
the dew, like oil of the olive, and the
appearance of its form, as of all the flowers
of the earth; further many angels guarding
the treasure-houses of these (things), and
how they are made to shut and open.
7.1 And those men took me and led me up
on to the second heaven, and showed me
darkness, greater than earthly darkness, and
there I saw prisoners hanging, watched,
awaiting the great and boundless judgment,
and these angels (spirits) were dark-looking,
more than earthly darkness, and incessantly
making weeping through all hours.
2 And I said to the men who were with me:
Wherefore are these incessantly tortured?
They answered me: These are God’s
apostates, who obeyed not God’s
commands, but took counsel with their own
will, and turned away with their prince, who
also (is) fastened on the fifth heaven.
3 And I felt great pity for them, and they
saluted me, and said to me: Man of God,
pray for us to the Lord; and I answered to
them: Who am I, a mortal man, that I should
pray for angels (spirits)? Who knows
whither I go, or what will befall me? Or who
will pray for me?
8.1 And those men took me thence, and led
me up on to the third heaven, and placed me
there; and I looked downwards, and saw the
produce of these places, such as has never
been known for goodness.
2 And I saw all the sweet-flowering trees
and beheld their fruits, which were sweetsmelling, and all the foods borne (by them)
bubbling with fragrant exhalation.
3 And in the midst of the trees that of life, in
that place whereon the Lord rests, when he
goes up into paradise; and this tree is of
ineffable goodness and fragrance, and
adorned more than every existing thing; and
on all sides (it is) in form gold-looking and
vermilion and fire-like and covers all, and it
has produce from all fruits.
4 Its root is in the garden at the earth’s end.
5 And paradise is between corruptibility and
incorruptibility.
6 And two springs come out which send
forth honey and milk, and their springs send
forth oil and wine, and they separate into
four parts, and go round with quiet course,
and go down into the PARADISE OF
EDEN, between corruptibility and
incorruptibility.
7 And thence they go forth along the earth,
and have a revolution to their circle even as
other elements.
8 And here there is no unfruitful tree, and
every place is blessed.
9 And (there are) three hundred angels very
bright, who keep the garden, and with
incessant sweet singing and never-silent
62
voices serve the Lord throughout all days
and hours.
10 And I said: How very sweet is this place,
and those men said to me:
9.1 This place, O Enoch, is prepared for
the righteous, who endure all manner of
offence from those that exasperate their
souls, who avert their eyes from iniquity,
and make righteous judgment, and give
bread to the hungering, and cover the naked
with clothing, and raise up the fallen, and
help injured orphans, and who walk without
fault before the face of the Lord, and serve
him alone, and for them is prepared this
place for eternal inheritance.
10.1 And those two men led me up on to
the Northern side, and showed me there a
very terrible place, and (there were) all
manner of tortures in that place: cruel
darkness and unillumined gloom, and there
is no light there, but murky fire constantly
flaming aloft, and (there is) a fiery river
coming forth, and that whole place is
everywhere fire, and everywhere (there is)
frost and ice, thirst and shivering, while the
bonds are very cruel, and the angels (spirits)
fearful and merciless, bearing angry
weapons, merciless torture, and I said:
2 Woe, woe, how very terrible is this place.
3 And those men said to me: This place, O
Enoch, is prepared for those who dishonour
God, who on earth practice sin against
nature, which is child-corruption after the
sodomitic fashion, magic-making,
enchantments and devilish witchcrafts, and
who boast of their wicked deeds, stealing,
lies, calumnies, envy, rancour, fornication,
murder, and who, accursed, steal the souls of
men, who, seeing the poor take away their
goods and themselves wax rich, injuring
them for other men’s goods; who being able
to satisfy the empty, made the hungering to
die; being able to clothe, stripped the naked;
and who knew not their creator, and bowed
to the soulless (and lifeless) gods, who
cannot see nor hear, vain gods, (who also)
built hewn images and bow down to unclean
handiwork, for all these is prepared this
place among these, for eternal inheritance.
11.1 Those men took me, and led me up
on to the fourth heaven, and showed me all
the successive goings, and all the rays of the
light of sun and moon.
2 And I measure their goings, and compared
their light, and saw that the sun’s light is
greater than the moon’s.
3 Its circle and the wheels on which it goes
always, like the wind going past with very
marvellous speed, and day and night it has
no rest.
4 Its passage and return (are accompanied
by) four great stars, (and) each star has
under it a thousand stars, to the right of the
sun’s wheel, (and by) four to the left, each
having under it a thousand stars, altogether
eight thousand, issuing with the sun
continually.
5 And by day fifteen myriads of angels
attend it, and by night A thousand.
6 And six-winged ones issue with the angels
before the sun’s wheel into the fiery flames,
and a hundred angels kindle the sun and set
it alight.
12.1 And I looked and saw other flying
elements of the sun, whose names (are)
Phoenixes and Chalkydri, marvellous and
wonderful, with feet and tails in the form of
a lion, and a crocodile’s head, their
appearance (is) empurpled, like the rainbow;
their size (is) nine hundred measures, their
wings (are like) those of angels, each (has)
twelve, and they attend and accompany the
sun, bearing heat and dew, as it is ordered
them from God.
2 Thus (the sun) revolves and goes, and rises
under the heaven, and its course goes under
the earth with the light of its rays
incessantly.
63
13.1 Those men bore me away to the
east, and placed me at the sun’s gates, where
the sun goes forth according to the
regulation of the seasons and the circuit of
the months of the whole year, and the
number of the hours day and night.
2 And I saw six gates open, each gate having
sixty-one stadia and A quarter of one
stadium, and I measured (them) truly, and
understood their size (to be) so much,
through which the sun goes forth, and goes
to the west, and is made even, and rises
throughout all the months, and turns back
again from the six gates according to the
succession of the seasons; thus (the period)
of the whole year is finished after the returns
of the four seasons.
14.1 And again those men led me away
to the western parts, and showed me six
great gates open corresponding to the
eastern gates, opposite to where the sun sets,
according to the number of the days three
hundred and sixty-five and A quarter.
2 Thus again it goes down to the western
gates, (and) draws away its light, the
greatness of its brightness, under the earth;
for since the crown of its shining is in
heaven with the Lord, and guarded by four
hundred angels, while the sun goes round on
wheel under the earth, and stands seven
great hours in night, and spends half (its
course) under the earth, when it comes to the
eastern approach in the eighth hour of the
night, it brings its lights, and the crown of
shining, and the sun flames forth more than
fire.
15.1 Then the elements of the sun, called
Phoenixes and Chalkydri break into song,
therefore every bird flutters with its wings,
rejoicing at the giver of light, and they broke
into song at the command of the Lord.
2 The giver of light comes to give brightness
to the whole world, and the morning guard
takes shape, which is the rays of the sun, and
the sun of the earth goes out, and receives its
brightness to light up the whole face of the
earth, and they showed me this calculation
of the sun’s going.
3 And the gates which it enters, these are the
great gates of the calculation of the hours of
the year; for this reason the sun is a great
creation, whose circuit (lasts) twenty-eight
years, and begins again from the beginning.
16.1 Those men showed me the other
course, that of the moon, twelve great gates,
crowned from west to east, by which the
moon goes in and out of the customary
times.
2 It goes in at the first gate to the western
places of the sun, by the first gates with
(thirty)-one (days) exactly, by the second
gates with thirty-one days exactly, by the
third with thirty days exactly, by the fourth
with thirty days exactly, by the fifth with
thirty-one days exactly, by the sixth with
thirty-one days exactly, by the seventh with
thirty days exactly, by the eighth with thirtyone days perfectly, by the ninth with thirtyone days exactly, by the tenth with thirty
days perfectly, by the eleventh with thirtyone days exactly, by the twelfth with
twenty-eight days exactly.
3 And it goes through the western gates in
the order and number of the eastern, and
accomplishes the three hundred and sixtyfive and a quarter days of the solar year,
while the lunar year has three hundred fiftyfour, and there are wanting (to it) twelve
days of the solar circle, which are the lunar
epacts of the whole year.
4 Thus, too, the great circle contains five
hundred and thirty-two years.
5 The quarter (of a day) is omitted for three
years, the fourth fulfills it exactly.
6 Therefore they are taken outside of heaven
for three years and are not added to the
64
number of days, because they change the
time of the years to two new months towards
completion, to two others towards
diminution.
7 And when the western gates are finished,
it returns and goes to the eastern to the
lights, and goes thus day and night about the
heavenly circles, lower than all circles,
swifter than the heavenly winds, and spirits
and elements and angels flying; each angel
has six wings.
8 It has a sevenfold course in nineteen years.
17.1 In the midst of the heavens I saw
armed soldiers, serving the Lord, with
tympana and organs, with incessant voice,
with sweet voice, with sweet and incessant
(voice) and various singing, which it is
impossible to describe, and (which)
astonishes every mind, so wonderful and
marvellous is the singing of those angels,
and I was delighted listening to it.
18.1 The men took me on to the fifth
heaven and placed me, and there I saw many
and countless soldiers, called Grigori, of
human appearance, and their size (was)
greater than that of great giants and their
faces withered, and the silence of their
mouths perpetual, and their was no service
on the fifth heaven, and I said to the men
who were with me:
2 Wherefore are these very withered and
their faces melancholy, and their mouths
silent, and (wherefore) is there no service on
this heaven?
3 And they said to me: These are the
Grigori, who with their prince Satanail
(Satan) rejected the Lord of light, and after
them are those who are held in great
darkness on the second heaven, and three of
them went down on to earth from the Lord’s
throne, to the place Ermon, and broke
through their vows on the shoulder of the
hill Ermon and saw the daughters of men
how good they are, and took to themselves
wives, and befouled the earth with their
deeds, who in all times of their age made
lawlessness and mixing, and giants are born
and marvellous big men and great enmity.
4 And therefore God judged them with great
judgment, and they weep for their brethren
and they will be punished on the Lord’s
great day.
5 And I said to the Grigori: I saw your
brethren and their works, and their great
torments, and I prayed for them, but the
Lord has condemned them (to be) under
earth till (the existing) heaven and earth
shall end for ever.
6 And I said: Wherefore do you wait,
brethren, and do not serve before the Lord’s
face, and have not put your services before
the Lord’s face, lest you anger your Lord
utterly?
7 And they listened to my admonition, and
spoke to the four ranks in heaven, and lo! As
I stood with those two men four trumpets
trumpeted together with great voice, and the
Grigori broke into song with one voice, and
their voice went up before the Lord pitifully
and affectingly.
19.1 And thence those men took me and
bore me up on to the sixth heaven, and there
I saw seven bands of angels, very bright and
very glorious, and their faces shining more
than the sun’s shining, glistening, and there
is no difference in their faces, or behaviour,
or manner of dress; and these make the
orders, and learn the goings of the stars, and
the alteration of the moon, or revolution of
the sun, and the good government of the
world.
2 And when they see evildoing they make
commandments and instruction, and sweet
and loud singing, and all (songs) of praise.
3 These are the archangels who are above
angels, measure all life in heaven and on
earth, and the angels who are (appointed)
over seasons and years, the angels who are
65
over rivers and sea, and who are over the
fruits of the earth, and the angels who are
over every grass, giving food to all, to every
living thing, and the angels who write all the
souls of men, and all their deeds, and their
lives before the Lord’s face; in their midst
are six Phoenixes and six Cherubim and six
six-winged ones continually with one voice
singing one voice, and it is not possible to
describe their singing, and they rejoice
before the Lord at his footstool.
20.1 And those two men lifted me up
thence on to the seventh heaven, and I saw
there a very great light, and fiery troops of
great archangels, incorporeal forces, and
dominions, orders and governments,
Cherubim and seraphim, thrones and manyeyed ones, nine regiments, the Ioanit stations
of light, and I became afraid, and began to
tremble with great terror, and those men
took me, and led me after them, and said to
me:
2 Have courage, Enoch, do not fear, and
showed me the Lord from afar, sitting on
His very high throne. For what is there on
the tenth heaven, since the Lord dwells
there?
3 On the tenth heaven is God, in the Hebrew
tongue he is called Aravat.
4 And all the heavenly troops would come
and stand on the ten steps according to their
rank, and would bow down to the Lord, and
would again go to their places in joy and
felicity, singing songs in the boundless light
with small and tender voices, gloriously
serving him.
21.1 And the Cherubim and seraphim
standing about the throne, the six-winged
and many-eyed ones do not depart, standing
before the Lord’s face doing his will, and
cover his whole throne, singing with gentle
voice before the Lord’s face: Holy, holy,
holy, Lord Ruler of Sabaoth, heavens and
earth are full of Your glory.
2 When I saw all these things, those men
said to me: Enoch, thus far is it commanded
us to journey with you, and those men went
away from me and thereupon I saw them
not.
3 And I remained alone at the end of the
seventh heaven and became afraid, and fell
on my face and said to myself: Woe is me,
what has befallen me?
4 And the Lord sent one of his glorious
ones, the archangel Gabriel, and (he) said to
me: Have courage, Enoch, do not fear, arise
before the Lord’s face into eternity, arise,
come with me.
5 And I answered him, and said in myself:
My Lord, my soul is departed from me, from
terror and trembling, and I called to the men
who led me up to this place, on them I
relied, and (it is) with them I go before the
Lord’s face.
6 And Gabriel caught me up, as a leaf
caught up by the wind, and placed me before
the Lord’s face.
7 And I saw the eighth heaven, which is
called in the Hebrew tongue Muzaloth,
changer of the seasons, of drought, and of
wet, and of the twelve constellations of the
circle of the firmament, which are above the
seventh heaven.
8 And I saw the ninth heaven, which is
called in Hebrew Kuchavim, where are the
heavenly homes of the twelve constellations
of the circle of the firmament.
22.1 On the tenth heaven, (which is
called) Aravoth, I saw the appearance of the
Lord’s face, like iron made to glow in fire,
and brought out, emitting sparks, and it
burns.
2 Thus (in a moment of eternity) I saw the
Lord's face, but the Lord’s face is ineffable,
marvellous and very awful, and very, very
terrible.
66
3 And who am I to tell of the Lord’s
unspeakable being, and of his very
wonderful face? And I cannot tell the
quantity of his many instructions, and
various voices, the Lord's throne (is) very
great and not made with hands, nor the
quantity of those standing round him, troops
of Cherubim and seraphim, nor their
incessant singing, nor his immutable beauty,
and who shall tell of the ineffable greatness
of his glory.
4 And I fell prone and bowed down to the
Lord, and the Lord with his lips said to me:
5 Have courage, Enoch, do not fear, arise
and stand before my face into eternity.
6 And the archistratege Michael lifted me
up, and led me to before the Lord’s face.
7 And the Lord said to his servants tempting
them: Let Enoch stand before my face into
eternity, and the glorious ones bowed down
to the Lord, and said: Let Enoch go
according to Your word.
8 And the Lord said to Michael: Go and take
Enoch from out (of) his earthly garments,
and anoint him with my sweet ointment, and
put him into the garments of My glory.
9 And Michael did thus, as the Lord told
him. He anointed me, and dressed me, and
the appearance of that ointment is more than
the great light, and his ointment is like sweet
dew, and its smell mild, shining like the
sun’s ray, and I looked at myself, and (I)
was like (transfigured) one of his glorious
ones.
10 And the Lord summoned one of his
archangels by name Pravuil, whose
knowledge was quicker in wisdom than the
other archangels, who wrote all the deeds of
the Lord; and the Lord said to Pravuil: Bring
out the books from my store-houses, and a
reed of quick-writing, and give (it) to Enoch,
and deliver to him the choice and
comforting books out of your hand.
23.1 And he was telling me all the works
of heaven, earth and sea, and all the
elements, their passages and goings, and the
thunderings of the thunders, the sun and
moon, the goings and changes of the stars,
the seasons, years, days, and hours, the
risings of the wind, the numbers of the
angels, and the formation of their songs, and
all human things, the tongue of every human
song and life, the commandments,
instructions, and sweet-voiced singings, and
all things that it is fitting to learn.
2 And Pravuil told me: All the things that I
have told you, we have written. Sit and write
all the souls of mankind, however many of
them are born, and the places prepared for
them to eternity; for all souls are prepared to
eternity, before the formation of the world.
3 And all double thirty days and thirty
nights, and I wrote out all things exactly,
and wrote three hundred and sixty-six
books.
24.1 And the Lord summoned me, and
said to me: Enoch, sit down on my left with
Gabriel.
2 And I bowed down to the Lord, and the
Lord spoke to me: Enoch, beloved, all (that)
you see, all things that are standing finished
I tell to you even before the very beginning,
all that I created from non-being, and visible
(physical) things from invisible (spiritual).
3 Hear, Enoch, and take in these my words,
for not to My angels have I told my secret,
and I have not told them their rise, nor my
endless realm, nor have they understood my
creating, which I tell you to-day.
4 For before all things were visible
(physical), I alone used to go about in the
invisible (spiritual) things, like the sun from
east to west, and from west to east.
5 But even the sun has peace in itself, while
I found no peace, because I was creating all
things, and I conceived the thought of
67
placing foundations, and of creating visible
(physical) creation.
25.1 I commanded in the very lowest
(parts), that visible (physical) things should
come down from invisible (spiritual), and
Adoil came down very great, and I beheld
him, and lo! He had a belly of great light.
2 And I said to him: Become undone, Adoil,
and let the visible (physical) (come) out of
you.
3 And he came undone, and a great light
came out. And I (was) in the midst of the
great light, and as there is born light from
light, there came forth a great age, and
showed all creation, which I had thought to
create.
4 And I saw that (it was) good.
5 And I placed for myself a throne, and took
my seat on it, and said to the light: Go
thence up higher and fix yourself high above
the throne, and be A foundation to the
highest things.
6 And above the light there is nothing else,
and then I bent up and looked up from my
throne.
26.1 And I summoned the very lowest a
second time, and said: Let Archas come
forth hard, and he came forth hard from the
invisible (spiritual).
2 And Archas came forth, hard, heavy, and
very red.
3 And I said: Be opened, Archas, and let
there be born from you, and he came
undone, an age came forth, very great and
very dark, bearing the creation of all lower
things, and I saw that (it was) good and said
to him:
4 Go thence down below, and make yourself
firm, and be a foundation for the lower
things, and it happened and he went down
and fixed himself, and became the
foundation for the lower things, and below
the darkness there is nothing else.
27.1 And I commanded that there should
be taken from light and darkness, and I said:
Be thick, and it became thus, and I spread it
out with the light, and it became water, and I
spread it out over the darkness, below the
light, and then I made firm the waters, that is
to say the bottomless, and I made foundation
of light around the water, and created seven
circles from inside, and imaged (the water)
like crystal wet and dry, that is to say like
glass, (and) the circumcession of the waters
and the other elements, and I showed each
one of them its road, and the seven stars
each one of them in its heaven, that they go
thus, and I saw that it was good.
2 And I separated between light and
between darkness, that is to say in the midst
of the water hither and thither, and I said to
the light, that it should be the day, and to the
darkness, that it should be the night, and
there was evening and there was morning
the first day.
28.1 And then I made firm the heavenly
circle, and (made) that the lower water
which is under heaven collect itself together,
into one whole, and that the chaos become
dry, and it became so.
2 Out of the waves I created rock hard and
big, and from the rock I piled up the dry, and
the dry I called earth, and the midst of the
earth I called abyss, that is to say the
bottomless, I collected the sea in one place
and bound it together with a yoke.
3 And I said to the sea: Behold I give you
(your) eternal limits, and you shalt not break
loose from your component parts.
4 Thus I made fast the firmament. This day I
called me the first-created [Sunday].
68
29.1 And for all the heavenly troops I
imaged the image and essence of fire, and
my eye looked at the very hard, firm rock,
and from the gleam of my eye the lightning
received its wonderful nature, (which) is
both fire in water and water in fire, and one
does not put out the other, nor does the one
dry up the other, therefore the lightning is
brighter than the sun, softer than water and
firmer than hard rock.
2 And from the rock I cut off a great fire,
and from the fire I created the orders of the
incorporeal ten troops of angels, and their
weapons are fiery and their raiment a
burning flame, and I commanded that each
one should stand in his order.
3 And one from out the order of angels,
having turned away with the order that was
under him, conceived an impossible thought,
to place his throne higher than the clouds
above the earth, that he might become equal
in rank to my power.
4 And I threw him out from the height with
his angels, and he was flying in the air
continuously above the bottomless.
30.1 On the third day I commanded the
earth to make grow great and fruitful trees,
and hills, and seed to sow, and I planted
Paradise, and enclosed it, and placed as
armed (guardians) flaming angels, and thus I
created renewal.
2 Then came evening, and came morning the
fourth day.
3 [Wednesday]. On the fourth day I
commanded that there should be great lights
on the heavenly circles.
4 On the first uppermost circle I placed the
stars, Kruno, and on the second Aphrodit, on
the third Aris, on the fifth Zoues, on the
sixth Ermis, on the seventh lesser the moon,
and adorned it with the lesser stars.
5 And on the lower I placed the sun for the
illumination of day, and the moon and stars
for the illumination of night.
6 The sun that it should go according to each
constellation, twelve, and I appointed the
succession of the months and their names
and lives, their thunderings, and their hourmarkings, how they should succeed.
7 Then evening came and morning came the
fifth day.
8 [Thursday]. On the fifth day I commanded
the sea, that it should bring forth fishes, and
feathered birds of many varieties, and all
animals creeping over the earth, going forth
over the earth on four legs, and soaring in
the air, male sex and female, and every soul
breathing the spirit of life.
9 And there came evening, and there came
morning the sixth day.
10 [Friday]. On the sixth day I commanded
my wisdom to create man from seven
consistencies: one, his flesh from the earth;
two, his blood from the dew; three, his eyes
from the sun; four, his bones from stone;
five, his intelligence from the swiftness of
the angels and from cloud; six, his veins and
his hair from the grass of the earth; seven,
his soul from my breath and from the wind.
11 And I gave him seven natures: to the
flesh hearing, the eyes for sight, to the soul
smell, the veins for touch, the blood for
taste, the bones for endurance, to the
intelligence sweetness [enjoyment].
12 I conceived a cunning saying to say, I
created man from invisible (spiritual) and
from visible (physical) nature, of both are
his death and life and image, he knows
speech like some created thing, small in
greatness and again great in smallness, and I
placed him on earth, a second angel,
honourable, great and glorious, and I
appointed him as ruler to rule on earth and
to have my wisdom, and there was none like
him of earth of all my existing creatures.
69
13 And I appointed him a name, from the
four component parts, from east, from west,
from south, from north, and I appointed for
him four special stars, and I called his name
Adam, and showed him the two ways, the
light and the darkness, and I told him:
14 This is good, and that bad, that I should
learn whether he has love towards me, or
hatred, that it be clear which in his race love
me.
15 For I have seen his nature, but he has not
seen his own nature, therefore (through) not
seeing he will sin worse, and I said After sin
(what is there) but death?
16 And I put sleep into him and he fell
asleep. And I took from him A rib, and
created him a wife, that death should come
to him by his wife, and I took his last word
and called her name mother, that is to say,
Eva (Eve).
31.1 Adam has life on earth, and I
created a garden in Eden in the east, that he
should observe the testament and keep the
command.
2 I made the heavens open to him, that he
should see the angels singing the song of
victory, and the gloomless light.
3 And he was continuously in paradise, and
the devil understood that I wanted to create
another world, because Adam was lord on
earth, to rule and control it.
4 The devil is the evil spirit of the lower
places, as a fugitive he made Sotona from
the heavens as his name was Satanail
(Satan), thus he became different from the
angels, (but his nature) did not change (his)
intelligence as far as (his) understanding of
righteous and sinful (things).
5 And he understood his condemnation and
the sin which he had sinned before, therefore
he conceived thought against Adam, in such
form he entered and seduced Eva (Eve), but
did not touch Adam.
6 But I cursed ignorance, but what I had
blessed previously, those I did not curse, I
cursed not man, nor the earth, nor other
creatures, but man’s evil fruit, and his
works.
32.1 I said to him: Earth you are, and
into the earth whence I took you you shalt
go, and I will not ruin you, but send you
whence I took you.
2 Then I can again receive you at My second
presence.
3 And I blessed all my creatures visible
(physical) and invisible (spiritual). And
Adam was five and half hours in paradise.
4 And I blessed the seventh day, which is
the Sabbath, on which he rested from all his
works.
33.1 And I appointed the eighth day also,
that the eighth day should be the firstcreated after my work, and that (the first
seven) revolve in the form of the seventh
thousand, and that at the beginning of the
eighth thousand there should be a time of
not-counting, endless, with neither years nor
months nor weeks nor days nor hours.
2 And now, Enoch, all that I have told you,
all that you have understood, all that you
have seen of heavenly things, all that you
have seen on earth, and all that I have
written in books by my great wisdom, all
these things I have devised and created from
the uppermost foundation to the lower and
to the end, and there is no counsellor nor
inheritor to my creations.
3 I am self-eternal, not made with hands,
and without change.
4 My thought is my counsellor, my wisdom
and my word are made, and my eyes
observe all things how they stand here and
tremble with terror.
70
5 If I turn away my face, then all things will
be destroyed.
6 And apply your mind, Enoch, and know
him who is speaking to you, and take thence
the books which you yourself have written.
7 And I give you Samuil and Raguil, who
led you up, and the books, and go down to
earth, and tell your sons all that I have told
you, and all that you have seen, from the
lower heaven up to my throne, and all the
troops.
8 For I created all forces, and there is none
that resists me or that does not subject
himself to me. For all subject themselves to
my monarchy, and labour for my sole rule.
9 Give them the books of the handwriting,
and they will read (them) and will know me
for the creator of all things, and will
understand how there is no other God but
me.
10 And let them distribute the books of your
handwriting–children to children, generation
to generation, nations to nations.
11 And I will give you, Enoch, my
intercessor, the archistratege Michael, for
the handwritings of your fathers Adam,
Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahaleleel, and Jared
your father.
34.1 They have rejected my
commandments and my yoke, worthless
seed has come up, not fearing God, and they
would not bow down to me, but have begun
to bow down to vain gods, and denied my
unity, and have laden the whole earth with
untruths, offences, abominable lecheries,
namely one with another, and all manner of
other unclean wickedness, which are
disgusting to relate.
2 And therefore I will bring down a deluge
upon the earth and will destroy all men, and
the whole earth will crumble together into
great darkness.
35.1 Behold from their seed shall arise
another generation, much afterwards, but of
them many will be very insatiate.
2 He who raises that generation, (shall)
reveal to them the books of your
handwriting, of your fathers, (to them) to
whom he must point out the guardianship of
the world, to the faithful men and workers of
my pleasure, who do not acknowledge my
name in vain.
3 And they shall tell another generation, and
those (others) having read shall be glorified
thereafter, more than the first.
36.1 Now, Enoch, I give you the term of
thirty days to spend in your house, and tell
your sons and all your household, that all
may hear from my face what is told them by
you, that they may read and understand, how
there is no other God but me.
2 And that they may always keep my
commandments, and begin to read and take
in the books of your handwriting.
3 And after thirty days I shall send my angel
for you, and he will take you from earth and
from your sons to me.
37.1 And the Lord called upon one of the
older angels, terrible and menacing, and
placed him by me, in appearance white as
snow, and his hands like ice, having the
appearance of great frost, and he froze my
face, because I could not endure the terror of
the Lord, just as it is not possible to endure
A stove’s fire and the sun’s heat, and the
frost of the air.
2 And the Lord said to me: Enoch, if your
face be not frozen here, no man will be able
to behold your face.
38.1 And the Lord said to those men who
first led me up: Let Enoch go down on to
71
earth with you, and await him till the
determined day.
2 And they placed me by night on my bed.
3 And Mathusal (Methuselah) expecting my
coming, keeping watch by day and by night
at my bed, was filled with awe when he
heard my coming, and I told him, Let all my
household come together, that I tell them
everything.
39.1 Oh my children, my beloved ones,
hear the admonition of your father, as much
as is according to the Lord’s will.
2 I have been let come to you to-day, and
announce to you, not from my lips, but from
the Lord’s lips, all that is and was and all
that is now, and all that will be till
judgment-day.
3 For the Lord has let me come to you, you
hear therefore the words of my lips, of a
man made big for you, but I am one who has
seen the Lord’s face, like iron made to glow
from fire it sends forth sparks and burns.
4 You look now upon my eyes, (the eyes) of
a man big with meaning for you, but I have
seen the Lord’s eyes, shining like the sun’s
rays and filling the eyes of man with awe.
5 You see now, my children, the right hand
of a man that helps you, but I have seen the
Lord’s right hand filling heaven as he helped
me.
6 You see the compass of my work like your
own, but I have seen the Lord’s limitless and
perfect compass, which has no end.
7 You hear the words of my lips, as I heard
the words of the Lord, like great thunder
incessantly with hurling of clouds.
8 And now, my children, hear the discourses
of the father of the earth, how fearful and
awful it is to come before the face of the
ruler of the earth, how much more terrible
and awful it is to come before the face of the
ruler of heaven, the controller (judge) of
quick and dead, and of the heavenly troops.
Who can endure that endless pain?
40.1 And now, my children, I know all
things, for this (is) from the Lord’s lips, and
this my eyes have seen, from beginning to
end.
2 I know all things, and have written all
things into books, the heavens and their end,
and their plenitude, and all the armies and
their marchings.
3 I have measured and described the stars,
the great countless multitude (of them).
4 What man has seen their revolutions, and
their entrances? For not even the angels see
their number, while I have written all their
names.
5 And I measured the sun’s circle, and
measured its rays, counted the hours, I wrote
down too all things that go over the earth, I
have written the things that are nourished,
and all seed sown and unsown, which the
earth produces and all plants, and every
grass and every flower, and their sweet
smells, and their names, and the dwellingplaces of the clouds, and their composition,
and their wings, and how they bear rain and
raindrops.
6 And I investigated all things, and wrote
the road of the thunder and of the lightning,
and they showed me the keys and their
guardians, their rise, the way they go; it is
let out (gently) in measure by a chain, lest
by A heavy chain and violence it hurl down
the angry clouds and destroy all things on
earth.
7 I wrote the treasure-houses of the snow,
and the store-houses of the cold and the
frosty airs, and I observed their season’s
key-holder, he fills the clouds with them,
and does not exhaust the treasure-houses.
8 And I wrote the resting-places of the
winds and observed and saw how their key72
holders bear weighing-scales and measures;
first, they put them in (one) weighing-scale,
then in the other the weights and let them
out according to measure cunningly over the
whole earth, lest by heavy breathing they
make the earth to rock.
9 And I measured out the whole earth, its
mountains, and all hills, fields, trees, stones,
rivers, all existing things I wrote down, the
height from earth to the seventh heaven, and
downwards to the very lowest hell, and the
judgment-place, and the very great, open
and weeping hell.
10 And I saw how the prisoners are in pain,
expecting the limitless judgment.
11 And I wrote down all those being judged
by the judge, and all their judgment (and
sentences) and all their works.
41.1 And I saw all forefathers from (all)
time with Adam and Eva (Eve), and I sighed
and broke into tears and said of the ruin of
their dishonour:
2 Woe is me for my infirmity and (for that)
of my forefathers, and thought in my heart
and said:
3 Blessed (is) the man who has not been
born or who has been born and shall not sin
before the Lord’s face, that he come not into
this place, nor bring the yoke of this place.
42.1 I saw the key-holders and guards of
the gates of hell standing, like great
serpents, and their faces like extinguishing
lamps, and their eyes of fire, their sharp
teeth, and I saw all the Lord’s works, how
they are right, while the works of man are
some (good), and others bad, and in their
works are known those who lie evilly.
43.1 I, my children, measured and wrote
out every work and every measure and every
righteous judgment.
2 As (one) year is more honourable than
another, so is (one) man more honourable
than another, some for great possessions,
some for wisdom of heart, some for
particular intellect, some for cunning, one
for silence of lip, another for cleanliness,
one for strength, another for comeliness, one
for youth, another for sharp wit, one for
shape of body, another for sensibility, let it
be heard everywhere, but there is none better
than he who fears God, he shall be more
glorious in time to come.
44.1 The Lord with his hands having
created man, in the likeness of his own face,
the Lord made him small and great.
2 Whoever reviles the ruler’s face, and
abhors the Lord’s face, has despised the
Lord's face, and he who vents anger on any
man without injury, the Lord’s great anger
will cut him down, he who spits on the face
of man reproachfully, will be cut down at
the Lord’s great judgment.
3 Blessed is the man who does not direct his
heart with malice against any man, and helps
the injured and condemned, and raises the
broken down, and shall do charity to the
needy, because on the day of the great
judgment every weight, every measure and
every makeweight (will be) as in the market,
that is to say (they are) hung on scales and
stand in the market, (and every one) shall
learn his own measure, and according to his
measure shall take his reward.
45.1 Whoever hastens to make offerings
before the Lord’s face, the Lord for his part
will hasten that offering by granting of his
work.
2 But whoever increases his lamp before the
Lord’s face and make not true judgment, the
73
Lord will (not) increase his treasure in the
realm of the highest.
3 When the Lord demands bread, or candles,
or (the )flesh (of beasts), or any other
sacrifice, then that is nothing; but God
demands pure hearts, and with all that (only)
tests the heart of man.
46.1 Hear, my people, and take in the
words of my lips.
2 If any one bring any gifts to an earthly
ruler, and have disloyal thoughts in his
heart, and the ruler know this, will he not be
angry with him, and not refuse his gifts, and
not give him over to judgment?
3 Or (if) one man make himself appear good
to another by deceit of tongue, but (have)
evil in his heart, then will not (the other)
understand the treachery of his heart, and
himself be condemned, since his untruth was
plain to all?
4 And when the Lord shall send a great
light, then there will be judgment for the just
and the unjust, and there no one shall escape
notice.
47.1 And now, my children, lay thought
on your hearts, mark well the words of your
father, which are all (come) to you from the
Lord’s lips.
2 Take these books of your father’s
handwriting and read them.
3 For the books are many, and in them you
will learn all the Lord’s works, all that has
been from the beginning of creation, and
will be till the end of time.
4 And if you will observe my handwriting,
you will not sin against the Lord; because
there is no other except the Lord, neither in
heaven, nor in earth, nor in the very lowest
(places), nor in the (one) foundation.
5 The Lord has placed the foundations in the
unknown, and has spread forth heavens
visible (physical) and invisible (spiritual); he
fixed the earth on the waters, and created
countless creatures, and who has counted the
water and the foundation of the unfixed, or
the dust of the earth, or the sand of the sea,
or the drops of the rain, or the morning dew,
or the wind’s breathings? Who has filled
earth and sea, and the indissoluble winter?
6 I cut the stars out of fire, and decorated
heaven, and put it in their midst.
48.1 That the sun go along the seven
heavenly circles, which are the appointment
of one hundred and eighty-two thrones, that
it go down on a short day, and again one
hundred and eighty-two, that it go down on
a big day, and he has two thrones on which
he rests, revolving hither and thither above
the thrones of the months, from the
seventeenth day of the month Tsivan it goes
down to the month Thevan, from the
seventeenth of Thevan it goes up.
2 And thus it goes close to the earth, then
the earth is glad and makes grow its fruits,
and when it goes away, then the earth is sad,
and trees and all fruits have no florescence.
3 All this he measured, with good
measurement of hours, and fixed A measure
by his wisdom, of the visible (physical) and
the invisible (spiritual).
4 From the invisible (spiritual) he made all
things visible (physical), himself being
invisible (spiritual).
5 Thus I make known to you, my children,
and distribute the books to your children,
into all your generations, and amongst the
nations who shall have the sense to fear
God, let them receive them, and may they
come to love them more than any food or
earthly sweets, and read them and apply
themselves to them.
6 And those who understand not the Lord,
who fear not God, who accept not, but
74
reject, who do not receive the (books), a
terrible judgment awaits these.
7 Blessed is the man who shall bear their
yoke and shall drag them along, for he shall
be released on the day of the great judgment.
49.1 I swear to you, my children, but I
swear not by any oath, neither by heaven nor
by earth, nor by any other creature which
God created.
2 The Lord said: There is no oath in me, nor
injustice, but truth.
3 If there is no truth in men, let them swear
by the words, Yea, yea, or else, Nay, nay.
4 And I swear to you, yea, yea, that there
has been no man in his mother’s womb, (but
that) already before, even to each one there
is a place prepared for the repose of that
soul, and a measure fixed how much it is
intended that a man be tried in this world.
5 Yea, children, deceive not yourselves, for
there has been previously prepared a place
for every soul of man.
50.1 I have put every man’s work in
writing and none born on earth can remain
hidden nor his works remain concealed.
2 I see all things.
3 Now therefore, my children, in patience
and meekness spend the number of your
days, that you inherit endless life.
4 Endure for the sake of the Lord every
wound, every injury, every evil word and
attack.
5 If ill-requitals befall you, return (them) not
either to neighbour or enemy, because the
Lord will return (them) for you and be your
avenger on the day of great judgment, that
there be no avenging here among men.
6 Whoever of you spends gold or silver for
his brother’s sake, he will receive ample
treasure in the world to come.
7 Injure not widows nor orphans nor
strangers, lest God’s wrath come upon you.
51.1 Stretch out your hands to the poor
according to your strength.
2 Hide not your silver in the earth.
3 Help the faithful man in affliction, and
affliction will not find you in the time of
your trouble.
4 And every grievous and cruel yoke that
come upon you bear all for the sake of the
Lord, and thus you will find your reward in
the day of judgment.
5 It is good to go morning, midday, and
evening into the Lord’s dwelling, for the
glory of your creator.
6 Because every breathing (thing) glorifies
him, and every creature visible (physical)
and invisible (spiritual) returns him praise.
52.1 Blessed is the man who opens his
lips in praise of God of Sabaoth and praises
the Lord with his heart.
2 Cursed every man who opens his lips for
the bringing into contempt and calumny of
his neighbour, because he brings God into
contempt.
3 Blessed is he who opens his lips blessing
and praising God.
4 Cursed is he before the Lord all the days
of his life, who opens his lips to curse and
abuse.
5 Blessed is he who blesses all the Lord’s
works.
6 Cursed is he who brings the Lord’s
creation into contempt.
75
7 Blessed is he who looks down and raises
the fallen.
8 Cursed is he who looks to and is eager for
the destruction of what is not his.
9 Blessed is he who keeps the foundations of
his fathers made firm from the beginning.
10 Cursed is he who perverts the decrees of
his forefathers.
11 Blessed is he who imparts peace and
love.
12 Cursed is he who disturbs those that love
their neighbours.
13 Blessed is he who speaks with humble
tongue and heart to all.
14 Cursed is he who speaks peace with his
tongue, while in his heart there is no peace
but a sword.
15 For all these things will be laid bare in
the weighing-scales and in the books, on the
day of the great judgment.
53.1 And now, my children, do not say:
Our father is standing before God, and is
praying for our sins, for there is there no
helper of any man who has sinned.
2 You see how I wrote all works of every
man, before his creation, (all) that is done
amongst all men for all time, and none can
tell or relate my handwriting, because the
Lord see all imaginings of man, how they
are vain, where they lie in the treasurehouses of the heart.
3 And now, my children, mark well all the
words of your father, that I tell you, lest you
regret, saying: Why did our father not tell
us?
54.1 At that time, not understanding this
let these books which I have given you be
for an inheritance of your peace.
2 Hand them to all who want them, and
instruct them, that they may see the Lord’s
very great and marvellous works.
55.1 My children, behold, the day of my
term and time have approached.
2 For the angels who shall go with me are
standing before me and urge me to my
departure from you; they are standing here
on earth, awaiting what has been told them.
3 For to-morrow I shall go up on to heaven,
to the uppermost Jerusalem to my eternal
inheritance.
4 Therefore I bid you do before the Lord’s
face all (his) good pleasure.
56.1 Mathosalam having answered his
father Enoch, said: What is agreeable to
your eyes, father, that I may make before
your face, that you may bless our dwellings,
and your sons, and that your people may be
made glorious through you, and then (that)
you may depart thus, as the Lord said?
2 Enoch answered to his son Mathosalam
(and) said: Hear, child, from the time when
the Lord anointed me with the ointment of
his glory, (there has been no) food in me,
and my soul remembers not earthly
enjoyment, neither do I want anything
earthly.
57.1 My child Methosalam, summon all
your brethren and all your household and the
elders of the people, that I may talk to them
and depart, as is planned for me.
2 And Methosalam made haste, and
summoned his brethren, Regim, Riman,
Uchan, Chermion, Gaidad, and all the elders
76
of the people before the face of his father
Enoch; and he blessed them, (and) said to
them:
58.1 Listen to me, my children, to-day.
2 In those days when the Lord came down
on to earth for Adam’s sake, and visited all
his creatures, which he created himself, after
all these he created Adam, and the Lord
called all the beasts of the earth, all the
reptiles, and all the birds that soar in the air,
and brought them all before the face of our
father Adam.
3 And Adam gave the names to all things
living on earth.
4 And the Lord appointed him ruler over all,
and subjected to him all things under his
hands, and made them dumb and made them
dull that they be commanded of man, and be
in subjection and obedience to him.
5 Thus also the Lord created every man lord
over all his possessions.
6 The Lord will not judge a single soul of
beast for man’s sake, but adjudges the souls
of men to their beasts in this world; for men
have a special place.
7 And as every soul of man is according to
number, similarly beasts will not perish, nor
all souls of beasts which the Lord created,
till the great judgment, and they will accuse
man, if he feed them ill.
59.1 Whoever defiles the soul of beasts,
defiles his own soul.
2 For man brings clean animals to make
sacrifice for sin, that he may have cure of his
soul.
3 And if they bring for sacrifice clean
animals, and birds, man has cure, he cures
his soul.
4 All is given you for food, bind it by the
four feet, that is to make good the cure, he
cures his soul.
5 But whoever kills beast without wounds,
kills his own souls and defiles his own flesh.
6 And he who does any beast any injury
whatsoever, in secret, it is evil practice, and
he defiles his own soul.
60.1 He who works the killing of a man’s
soul, kills his own soul, and kills his own
body, and there is no cure for him for all
time.
2 He who puts a man in any snare, shall
stick in it himself, and there is no cure for
him for all time.
3 He who puts a man in any vessel, his
retribution will not be wanting at the great
judgment for all time.
4 He who works crookedly or speaks evil
against any soul, will not make justice for
himself for all time.
61.1 And now, my children, keep your
hearts from every injustice, which the Lord
hates. Just as a man asks something for his
own soul from God, so let him do to every
living soul, because I know all things, how
in the great time to come there is much
inheritance prepared for men, good for the
good, and bad for the bad, without number
many.
2 Blessed are those who enter the good
houses, for in the bad houses there is no
peace nor return from them.
3 Hear, my children, small and great! When
man puts a good thought in his heart, brings
gifts from his labours before the Lord’s face
and his hands made them not, then the Lord
will turn away his face from the labour of
his hand, and (that) man cannot find the
labour of his hands.
77
4 And if his hands made it, but his heart
murmur, and his heart cease not making
murmur incessantly, he has not any
advantage.
62.1 Blessed is the man who in his
patience brings his gifts with faith before the
Lord’s face, because he will find forgiveness
of sins.
2 But if he take back his words before the
time, there is no repentance for him; and if
the time pass and he do not of his own will
what is promised, there is no repentance
after death.
3 Because every work which man does
before the time, is all deceit before men, and
sin before God.
63.1 When man clothes the naked and
fills the hungry, he will find reward from
God.
2 But if his heart murmur, he commits a
double evil; ruin of himself and of that
which he gives; and for him there will be no
finding of reward on account of that.
3 And if his own heart is filled with his food
and his own flesh, clothed with his own
clothing, he commits contempt, and will
forfeit all his endurance of poverty, and will
not find reward of his good deeds.
4 Every proud and magniloquent man is
hateful to the Lord, and every false speech,
clothed in untruth; it will be cut with the
blade of the sword of death, and thrown into
the fire, and shall burn for all time.
64.1 When Enoch had spoken these
words to his sons, all people far and near
heard how the Lord was calling Enoch. They
took counsel together:
2 Let us go and kiss Enoch, and two
thousand men came together and came to
the place Achuzan where Enoch was, and
his sons.
3 And the elders of the people, the whole
assembly, came and bowed down and began
to kiss Enoch and said to him:
4 Our father Enoch, (may) you (be) blessed
of the Lord, the eternal ruler, and now bless
your sons and all the people, that we may be
glorified to-day before your face.
5 For you shalt be glorified before the
Lord’s face for all time, since the Lord
chose you, rather than all men on earth, and
designated you writer of all his creation,
visible (physical) and invisible (spiritual),
and redeemed of the sins of man, and helper
of your household.
65.1 And Enoch answered all his people
saying: Hear, my children, before that all
creatures were created, the Lord created the
visible (physical) and invisible (spiritual)
things.
2 And as much time as there was and went
past, understand that after all that he created
man in the likeness of his own form, and put
into him eyes to see, and ears to hear, and
heart to reflect, and intellect wherewith to
deliberate.
3 And the Lord saw all man’s works, and
created all his creatures, and divided time,
from time he fixed the years, and from the
years he appointed the months, and from the
months he appointed the days, and of days
he appointed seven.
4 And in those he appointed the hours,
measured them out exactly, that man might
reflect on time and count years, months, and
hours, (their) alternation, beginning, and
end, and that he might count his own life,
from the beginning until death, and reflect
on his sin and write his work bad and good;
because no work is hidden before the Lord,
that every man might know his works and
never transgress all his commandments, and
78
keep my handwriting from generation to
generation.
5 When all creation visible (physical) and
invisible (spiritual), as the Lord created it,
shall end, then every man goes to the great
judgment, and then all time shall perish, and
the years, and thenceforward there will be
neither months nor days nor hours, they will
be adhered together and will not be counted.
6 There will be one aeon, and all the
righteous who shall escape the Lord’s great
judgment, shall be collected in the great
aeon, for the righteous the great aeon will
begin, and they will live eternally, and then
too there will be amongst them neither
labour, nor sickness, nor humiliation, nor
anxiety, nor need, nor brutality, nor night,
nor darkness, but great light.
7 And they shall have a great indestructible
wall, and a paradise bright and incorruptible
(eternal), for all corruptible (mortal) things
shall pass away, and there will be eternal
life.
66.1 And now, my children, keep your
souls from all injustice, such as the Lord
hates.
2 Walk before his face with terror and
trembling and serve him alone.
3 Bow down to the true God, not to dumb
idols, but bow down to his similitude, and
bring all just offerings before the Lord’s
face. The Lord hates what is unjust.
4 For the Lord sees all things; when man
takes thought in his heart, then he counsels
the intellects, and every thought is always
before the Lord, who made firm the earth
and put all creatures on it.
5 If you look to heaven, the Lord is there; if
you take thought of the sea’s deep and all
the under-earth, the Lord is there.
6 For the Lord created all things. Bow not
down to things made by man, leaving the
Lord of all creation, because no work can
remain hidden before the Lord’s face.
7 Walk, my children, in long-suffering, in
meekness, honesty, in provocation, in grief,
in faith and in truth, in (reliance on)
promises, in illness, in abuse, in wounds, in
temptation, in nakedness, in privation,
loving one another, till you go out from this
age of ills, that you become inheritors of
endless time.
8 Blessed are the just who shall escape the
great judgment, for they shall shine forth
more than the sun sevenfold, for in this
world the seventh part is taken off from all,
light, darkness, food, enjoyment, sorrow,
paradise, torture, fire, frost, and other things;
he put all down in writing, that you might
read and understand.
67.1 When Enoch had talked to the
people, the Lord sent out darkness on to the
earth, and there was darkness, and it covered
those men standing with Enoch, and they
took Enoch up on to the highest heaven,
where the Lord (is); and he received him and
placed him before his face, and the darkness
went off from the earth, and light came
again.
2 And the people saw and understood not
how Enoch had been taken, and glorified
God, and found a roll in which was traced
The Invisible (spiritual) God; and all went to
their dwelling places.
68.1 Enoch was born on the sixth day of
the month Tsivan, and lived three hundred
and sixty-five years.
2 He was taken up to heaven on the first day
of the month Tsivan and remained in heaven
sixty days.
3 He wrote all these signs of all creation,
which the Lord created, and wrote three
hundred and sixty-six books, and handed
them over to his sons and remained on earth
thirty days, and was again taken up to
79
heaven on the sixth day of the month
Tsivan, on the very day and hour when he
was born.
7 And they took sacrificial oxen and
summoned all people and sacrificed the
sacrifice before the Lord’s face.
4 As every man’s nature in this life is dark,
so are also his conception, birth, and
departure from this life.
8 All people, the elders of the people and the
whole assembly came to the feast and
brought gifts to the sons of Enoch.
5 At what hour he was conceived, at that
hour he was born, and at that hour too he
died.
9 And they made a great feast, rejoicing and
making merry three days, praising God, who
had given them such a sign through Enoch,
who had found favour with him, and that
they should hand it on to their sons from
generation to generation, from age to age.
6 Methosalam and his brethren, all the sons
of Enoch, made haste, and erected an altar at
that place called Achuzan, whence and
where Enoch had been taken up to heaven. 10 Amen.
80
INTRODUCTION
ENOCH 3
3 Enoch is an Old Testament Apocryphal book. 3 Enoch purports to have been written in the
second century CE, but its origins can only be traced to the fifth century.[1] Other names for 3
Enoch include "The Third Book of Enoch", "The Book of the Palaces", "The Book of Rabbi
Ishmael the High Priest" and "The Revelation of Metatron".
Content
Modern scholars describe this book as pseudepigraphal, as it says it is written by Rabbi Ishmael
who became a 'high priest' after visions of ascension to Heaven, 90 AD - 135 AD.[1] Rabbi
Ishmael is a leading figure of Merkabah literature.
The name Sefer Hekhalot (Hekhalot meaning Palaces/Temples), along with its proposed author,
places this book as a member of Hekalot/Merkabah lore. Its contents suggest that 3 Enoch's
contents and ideas are newer than those shown in other Merkabah texts.[4] The book does not
contain Merkabah hymns,[5] it has unique layout[6] and adjuration.[7] All these facts make 3
Enoch unique not just among Merkabah writings, but also within the writings of Enoch.
3 Enoch contains a number of Greek and Latin words. This book, unlike 1 Enoch, appears to
have been originally written in Hebrew. There are a number of indications suggesting that the
writers of 3 Enoch had knowledge of, and most likely read, 1 Enoch.
Some points that appear in Enoch 1 and Enoch 3 are:
Enoch ascends to Heaven in a storm chariot (3 Enoch 6:1; 7:1)
Enoch is transformed into an angel (3 Enoch 9:1-5; 15:1-2)
Enoch as an exalted angel is enthroned in Heaven (3 Enoch 10:1-3; 16:1)
Enoch receives a revelation of cosmological secrets of creation (3 Enoch 13:1-2)
The story about precious metals and how they will not avail their users and those that make idols
from them (3 Enoch 5:7-14)
One of the characters is a hostile angel named Azaz'el/Aza'el (3 Enoch 4:6; 5:9)
The main themes running through 3 Enoch are the ascension of Enoch into Heaven and his
transformation into the angel Metatron.
81
ENOCH 3
THE BOOK OF ENOCH
BY R. ISHMAEL BEN ELISHA
THE HIGH PRIEST
EDITED AND TRANSLATED BY
HUGO ODEBERG
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION :
R. Ishmael ascends to heaven to
behold the vision of the Merkaba
and
is given in charge to Metatron
AND ENOCH WALKED WITH GOD :
AND HE WAS NOT ; FOR GOD TOOK
HIM (Gen. v. 24)
Rabbi Ishmael said :
(1) When I ascended on high to behold the
vision of the Merkaba and had entered the
six Halls, one within the other:
(2) as soon as I reached the door of the
seventh Hall I stood still in prayer before the
Holy One, blessed be He, and, lifting up my
eyes on high (i.e. towards the Divine
Majesty), I said :
(3) " Lord of the Universe, I pray thee, that
the merit of Aaron, the son of Amram, the
lover of peace
and pursuer of peace, who received the
crown of priesthood from Thy Glory on the
mount of Sinai, be valid for me in this hour,
so that Qafsiel*, the prince, and the angels
with him may not get power over me nor
throw me down from the heavens ".
(4) Forthwith the Holy One, blessed be He,
sent to me Metatron, his Servant ('Ebed) the
angel, the Prince of the Presence, and he,
spreading his wings, with great joy came to
meet me so as to save me from their hand.
(5) And he took me by his hand in their
sight, saying to me: "Enter in peace before
the high and exalted King3 and behold the
picture of the Merkaba".
(6) Then I entered the seventh Hall, and he
led me to the camp(s) of Shekina and placed
me before 6the Holy One, blessed be He, to
behold the Merkaba.
(7) As soon as the princes of the Merkaba
and the flaming Seraphim perceived me,
they fixed their eyes upon me. Instantly
trembling and shuddering seized me and I
fell down and was benumbed by the radiant
image of their eyes and the splendid
appearance of their faces; until the Holy
One, blessed be He, rebuked them, saying:
(8) "My servants, my Seraphim, my
Kerubim and my 'Ophanniml Cover ye your
eyes before Ishmael, my son, my friend, my
beloved one and my glory, that he tremble
not nor shudder !"
(9) Forthwith Metatron the Prince of the
Presence, came and restored my spiritand
put me upon my feet.
(10) After that (moment) there was notin me
strength enough to say a song before the
Throne of Glory of the glorious King, the
mightiest of all kings, the most excellent of
all princes, until after the hour had passed.
(11) After one hour (had passed) the Holy
One, blessed be He, opened to me the gates
of Shekina, the gates of Peace, the gates of
Wisdom, the gates of Strength, the gates of
Power, the gates of Speech (Dibbur), the
gates of Song, the gates of Qedushsha, the
gates of Chant.
82
(12) And he enlightened my eyes and my
heart by words of psalm, song, praise,
exaltation, thanksgiving, extolment,
glorification, hymn and eulogy. And as I
opened my mouth, uttering a song before the
Holy One, blessed be He, the Holy
Chayyoth beneath and above the Throne of
Glory answered and said : "HOLY " and
"BLESSED BE THE GLORY OF YHWH
FROM HIS PLACE !"
(i.e. chanted the Qedushsha).
CHAPTER II
The highest classes of angels make
inquiries about R. Ishmael which
are answered by Metatron
R. Ishmael said:
(1) In that hour the eagles of the Merkaba,
the flaming 'Ophannim and the Seraphim of
consuming fire asked Metatron, saying to
him:
 (2) "Youth ! Why sufferest thou one born of
woman to enter and behold the Merkaba?
From which nation, from which tribe is this
one? What is his character?"
(3) Metatron answered and said to them :
"From the nation of Israel whom the Holy
One, blessed be He, chose for his people
from among seventy tongues (nations), from
the tribe of Levi, whom he set aside as a
contribution to his name and from the seed
of Aaron whom the Holy One, blessed be
He, did choose for his servant and put upon
him the crown of priesthood on Sinai".
(4) Forthwith they spake and said : "Indeed,
this one is worthy to behold the Merkaba ".
And they said: "Happy is the people that is
in such a case!".
CHAPTER III
Metatron has 70 names, but God
calls him 'Youth'
 R. Ishmael said:
(1) In that hour1 I asked Metatron, the angel,
the Prince of the Presence: "What is thy
name?"
(2) He answered me: "I have seventy names,
corresponding to the seventy tongues of the
world and all of them are based upon the
name Metatron, angel of the Presence; but
my King calls me 'Youth' (Na’ar)“
CHAPTER IV
Metatron is identical with Enoch
who was translated to heaven at the
time of the Deluge
R. Ishmael said :
(1) I asked Metatron and said to him: “Why
art thou called by the name of thy Creator,
by seventy names? Thou art greater than all
the princes, higher than all the angels,
beloved more than all the
servants, honoured above all the mighty
ones in kingship, greatness and glory : why
do they call thee ' Youth ' in the high
heavens ?"
(2) He answered and said to me: " Because I
am Enoch, the son of Jared.
(3) For when the generation of the flood
sinned and were confounded in their deeds,
saying unto God: 'Depart from us, for we
desire not the knowledge of thy ways’ (Job
xxi. 14), then the Holy One, blessed be He,
removed me from their midst to be a witness
against them in the high heavens to all the
inhabitants of the world, that they may not
say: 'The Merciful One is cruel”.
(4) What sinned all those multitudes, their
wives, their sons and their, daughters, their
horses, their mules and their cattle and their
property, and all the birds of the world, all
of which the Holy One, blessed be He,
destroyed from the world together with them
in the waters of the flood?
 (5) Hence the Holy One, blessed be He,
lifted me up in their lifetime before their
eyes to be a witness against them to the
future world. And the Holy One, blessed be
He, assigned me for a prince
and a ruler among the ministering angels.
(6) In that hour three of the ministering
angels, 'UZZA, 'AZZA and 'AZZAEL came
forth and brought charges against me in the
high heavens, saying before the Holy One,
blessed be He:
83
"Said not the Ancient Ones (First Ones)
rightly before Thee: < Do not create
man! ' " The Holy One, blessed be He,
answered and said unto them: "I have made
and I will bear, yea, I will carry and will
deliver". (Is. xlvi. 4.)
(7) As soon as they saw me, they said before
Him: "Lord of the Universe ! What is this
one that he should ascend to the height of
heights? Is not he one from among the sons
of [the sons of] those
who perished in the days of the Flood?
"What doeth he in the Raqia'?"
(8) Again, the Holy One, blessed be He,
answered and said to them: "What are ye,
that ye enter and speak in my presence? I
delight in this one more than in all of you,
and hence he shall be a prince and a ruler
over you in the high heavens."
(9) Forthwith all stood up and went out to
meet me, prostrated themselves before me
and said: "Happy art thou and happy is thy
father for thy Creator doth favour thee".
(10) And because I am small and a youth
among them in days, months and years,
therefore they call me "Youth" (Na'ar).
CHAPTER V
The idolatry of the generation of
Enosh causes God to remove the
Shekina from earth. The idolatry
inspired by 'Azza, 'Uzza and 'Azziel
R.Ishmael said: Metatron, the Prince of
the Presence, said to me:
(1) From the day when the Holy One,
blessed be He, expelled the first Adam from
the Garden of Eden (and onwards), Shekina
was dwelling upon a Kerub under the Tree
of Life.
(2) And the ministering angels were
gathering together and going down from
heaven in parties, from the Raqia in
companies and from the heavens in camps to
do His will in the whole world.
(3) And the first man and his generation
were sitting outside the gate of the Garden to
behold the radiant appearance of the
Shekina.
(4) For the silendour of the Shekina
traversed the world from one end to the
other (with a splendour) 365,000 times (that)
of the globe of the sun. And everyone who
made use of the splendour of the Shekina,
on him no flies and no gnats did rest, neither
was he ill nor suffered he any pain. No
demons got power over him, neither were
they able to injure him.
(5) When the Holy One, blessed be He, went
out and went in: from the Garden to Eden,
from Eden to the Garden, from the Garden
to Raqia and from Raqia to the Garden of
Eden then all and everyone beheld the
splendour of His Shekina and they were not
injured;
(6) until uthe time of the generation of
Enosh who was the head of all idol
worshippers of the world. (7) And what did
the generation of Enosh do? They went from
one end of the world to the other, and each
one brought silver, gold, precious stones and
pearls in heaps like unto mountains and hills
making idols out of them throughout all the
world. And they erected the idols in every
quarter of the world: the size of each idol
was 1000 parasangs.
(8) And they brought down the sun, the
moon, planets and constellations, and placed
them before the idols on their right hand and
on their left, to attend them even as they
attend the Holy One, blessed be He, as it is
written (1 Kings xxii. 19): "And all the host
of heaven was standing by him on his right
hand and on his left".
(9) What power was in them that they were
able to bring them down? They would not
have been able to bring them down but for
'Uzza, 'Azza and 'Azziel who taught them
sorceries whereby they brought them down
and made use of them
(10) In that time the ministering angels
brought charges (against them) before the
Holy One, blessed be He, saying before him:
"Master of the World! What hast thou to do
with the children of men? As it is written
(Ps. viii. 4) 'What is man (Enosh) that thou
art mindful of him?' 'Mah Adam' is not
written here, but 'Mah Enosh', for he
(Enosh) is the head of the idol worshippers.
(11) Why hast thou left the highest of the
high heavens, the abode of thy glorious
84
Name, and the high and exalted Throne in
‘Araboth Raqia’ in the highest and art gone
and dwellest with the children of men who
worship idols and equal thee to the idols.
(12)Now thou art on earth and the idols
likewise. What hast thou to do with the
inhabitants of the earth who worship idols?"
(13) Forthwith the Holy One, blessed be He,
lifted up His Shekina from the earth, from
their midst. (14) In that moment came the
ministering angels, the troops of hosts and
the armies of 'Araboth in thousand camps
and ten thousand hosts : they fetched
trumpets and took the horns in their hands
and surrounded the Shekina with all kinds of
songs.And He ascended to the high heavens,
as it is written (Ps. xlvii. 5): "God is gone up
with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a
trumpet ".
CHAPTER VI
Enoch lifted up to heaven together
with the Shekina.
Angels protests answered by God
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me :
(1) When the Holy One, blessed be He,
desired to lift me up on high, He first sent
'Anaphiel H (H = Tetragrammaton) the
Prince, and he took me from their midst in
their sight and carried me in great glory
upon a a fiery chariot with fiery horses,
servants of glory. And he lifted me up to the
high heavens together with the Shekina.
(2) As soon as I reached the high heavens,
the Holy Chayyoth, the 'Ophannim, the
Seraphim, the Kerubim, the Wheels of the
Merkaba (the Galgallim), and the ministers
of the consuming fire, perceiving my smell
from a distance of 365,ooo myriads of
parasangs, said: "What smell of one born of
woman and what taste of a white drop (is
this) that ascends on high, and (lo, he is
merely) a gnat among those who 'divide
flames (of fire)'?"
(3) The Holy One, blessed be He, answered
and spake unto them: "My servants, my
hosts, my Kerubim, my 'Ophannim, my
Seraphim! Be ye not displeased on account
of this! Since all the children of men have
denied me and my great Kingdom and are
gone worshipping idols, I have removed my
Shekina from among them and have lifted it
up on high. But this one whom I have taken
from among them is an ELECT ONE among
(the inhabitants of) the world and he is equal
to all of them in faith, righteousness and
perfection of deed and I have taken him for
(as) a tribute from my world under all the
heavens".
CHAPTER VII
Enoch raised upon the wings of the
Shekina to the place of the Throne,
the Merkaba and the angelic hosts
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me:
(1) When the Holy One, blessed be He, took
me away from the generation of the Flood,
he lifted me on the wings of the wind of
Shekina to the highest heaven and brought
me into the great palaces of the 'Araboth
Raqia' on high, where are the glorious
Throne of Shekina, the Merkaba, the troops
of anger, the armies of vehemence, the fiery
Shin'anim', the flaming Kerubim, and the
burning 'Ophannim, the flaming servants,
the flashing Chashmattim and the lightening
Seraphim. And he placed me (there) to
attend the Throne of Glory day after day.
CHAPTER VIII
The gates (of the treasuries of
heaven) opened to Metatron
R. Ishmael said : Metatron, the Prince of
the Presence, said to me :
(1) Before He appointed me to attend the
Throne of Glory, the Holy One, blessed be
He, opened to me
three hundred thousand gates of
Understanding
three hundred thousand gates of
Subtlety
three hundred thousand gates of Life
three hundred thousand gates of
grace and loving-kindness
85
three hundred thousand gates of love
three hundred thousand gates of Tora
three hundred thousand gates of
meekness
three hundred thousand gates of
maintenance
three hundred thousand gates' of
mercy
three hundred thousand gates of fear
of heaven
(2) In that hour the Holy One, blessed be
He, added in me wisdom unto wisdom,
understanding unto understanding, subtlety
unto subtlety, knowledge unto knowledge,
mercy unto mercy, instruction unto
instruction, love unto love, loving-kindness
unto loving-kindness, goodness unto
goodness, meekness unto meekness, power
unto power, strength unto strength, might
unto might, brilliance unto brilliance, beauty
unto beauty, splendour unto splendour, and I
was honoured and adorned with all these
good and praiseworthy things more than all
the children of heaven.
CHAPTER IX
Enoch receives blessings from the
Most High and is adorned with
angelic attributes
R. Ishmael said : Metatron, the Prince of
the Presence, said to me :
(1) After all these things the Holy One,
blessed be He, put His hand upon me and
blessed me with 536O blessings.
(2) And I was raised and enlarged to the size
of the length and width of the world.
(3) And He caused 72 wings to grow on me,
36 on each side. And each wing was as the
whole world.
(4) And He fixed on me 365 eyes : each eye
was as the great luminary.
(5) And He left no kind of splendour,
brilliance, radiance, beauty in (of) all the
lights of the universe that He did not fix on
me.
CHAPTER X
God places Metatron on a throne at
the door of the seventh Hall and
announces through the Herald, that
Metatron henceforth is God's
representative and ruler over all the
princes of kingdoms and all the
children of heaven, save the eight
high princes called YHWH by the
name of their King
R. Ishmael said : Metatron, the Prince of
the Presence, said to me :
(1) All these things the Holy One, blessed be
He, made for me:He made me a Throne,
similar to the Throne of Glory. And He
spread over me a curtain of splendour and
brilliant appearance, of beauty, grace and
mercy, similar to the curtain of the Throne
of Glory; and on it were fixed all kinds of
lights in the universe.
(2) And He placed it at the door of the
Seventh Hall and seated me on it.
(3) And the herald went forth into every
heaven, saying:This is Metatron, my servant.
I have made him into a prince and a ruler
over all the princes of my kingdoms and
over all the children of heaven, except the
eight great princes, the honoured and
revered ones who are called YHWH, by the
name of their King.
(4) And every angel and every prince who
has a word to speak in my presence (before
me) shall go into his presence (before him)
and shall speak to him (instead).
(5)And every command that he utters to you
in my name do ye observe and fulfil. For the
Prince of
Wisdom and the Prince of Understanding
have I committed to him to instruct him in
the wisdom of heavenly things and of
earthly things, in the wisdom of this world
and of the world to come.
(6) Moreover, I have set him over all the
treasuries of the palapes of Araboih and over
all the stores of life that I have in the high
heavens.
86
CHAPTER XI
God reveals all mysteries and
secrets to Metatron
R. Ishmael said : Metatron, the angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me:
(1) Henceforth the Holy One, blessed be He,
revealed to me all the mysteries of Tora and
all the secrets of wisdom and all the depths
of the Perfect Law; and all living beings'
thoughts of heart and all the secrets of the
universe and all the secrets of Creation were
revealed unto me even as they are revealed
unto the Maker of Creation.
(2) And I watched intently to behold the
secrets of the depth and the wonderful
mystery. Before a man did think in secret, I
saw (it) and before a man made a thing I
beheld it.
(3) And there was no thing on high nor in
the deep hidden from me.
CHAPTER XII
God clothes Metatron in a garment
of glory, puts a royal
crown on his head and calls him
"the Lesser YHWH"
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Prince of
the Presence, said to me:
(1) By reason of the love with which the
Holy One, blessed be He, loved me more
than all the children of heaven, He made me
a garment of glory on which were fixed all
kinds of lights, and He clad me in it.
(2)And He made me a robe of honour on
which were fixed all kinds of beauty,
splendour, brilliance and majesty.
(3) And he made me a royal crown in which
were fixed forty-nine costly stones like unto
the light of the globe of the sun.
(4) For its splendour went forth in the four
quarters of the 'Araboth Raqia', and in
(through) the seven heavens, and in the four
quarters of the world. And he put it on my
head.
(5) And He called me THE LESSER
YHWH in the presence of all His heavenly
household; as it is written (Ex. xxiii. 21):
"For my name is in him".
CHAPTER XIII
God writes with a flaming style on
Metatron's crown the
cosmic letters by which heaven and
earth were created
R. Ishmael said : Metatron, the angel, the
Prince of the Presence, the Glory of all
heavens, said to me :
(1) Because of the great love and mercy with
which the Holy One, blessed be He, loved
and cherished me more than all the children
of heaven, He wrote with his ringer with a
flaming style upon the crown on my head
the letters by which were created heaven and
earth, the seas and rivers, the mountains and
hills, the planets and constellations, the
lightnings, winds, earthquakes and voices
(thunders), the snow and hail, the stormwind and the tempest ; the letters by which
were created all the needs of the world and
all the orders of Creation.
(2) And every single letter sent forth time
after time as it were lightnings, time after
time as it were torches, time after time as it
were flames of fire, time after time (rays)
like [as] the rising of the sun and the moon
and the planets.
CHAPTER XIV
All the highest princes, the
elementary angels and the
planetary and sideric angels fear
and tremble at the sight of
Metatron crowned
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me :
(1) When the Holy One, blessed be He, put
this crown on my head, (then) trembled
before me all the Princes of Kingdoms who
are in the height of 'Araboth Raqiaf and all
the hosts of every heaven; and even the
princes (of) the 'Elim, the princes (of) the
'Er'ellim and the princes (of) the Tafsarim,
who are greater than all the ministering
angels who minister before the Throne of
87
Glory, shook, feared and trembled before me
when they beheld me.
(2) Even Sammael, the Prince of the
Accusers, who is greater than all the princes
of kingdoms on high; feared and trembled
before me.
(3) And even the angel of fire, and the angel
of hail, and the angel of the wind, and the
angel of the lightning, and the angel of
anger, and the angel of the thunder, and the
angel of the snow, and the angel of the rain
; and the angel of the day, and the angel of
the night, and the angel of the sun and the
angel of the moon, and the angel of the
planets and the angel of the constellations
who rule the world under their hands, feared
and trembled and were affrighted before me,
when they beheld me.
(4) These are the names of the rulers of the
world: Gabriel, the angel of the fire,
Baradiel, the angel of the hail, Ruchiel who
is appointed over the wind, Baraqiel who is
appointed over the lightnings,
Za'amiel who is appointed over the
vehemence, Ziqiel who is appointed over the
sparks, Zi'iel who is appointed over the
commotion, Zdaphiel who is appointed over
the storm-wind, Ra'amiel who is
appointed over the thunders, Rctashiel who
is appointed over the earthquake, Shalgiel
who is appointed over the snow, Matariel
who is appointed over the rain, Shimshiel
who is appointed over the day, Lailiel who
is appointed over the night, Galgalliel who is
appointed over the globe of the sun,
'Ophanniel who is appointed over the globe
of the moon, Kokbiel who is appointed over
the planets, Rahatiel who is appointed over
the constellations.
(5) And they all fell prostrate, when they
saw me. And they were not able to behold
me because of the majestic glory and beauty
of the appearance of the shining light of the
crown of glory upon my head.
CHAPTER XV
Metatron transformed into fire
R. Ishmael said : Metatron, the angel, the
 Prince of the Presence, the Glory of all
heavens, said to me :
(1) As soon as the Holy One, blessed be He,
took me in (His) service to attend the Throne
of Glory and the Wheels (Galgallim) of the
Merkaba and the needs of Shekina,
forthwith my flesh was changed into flames,
my sinews into flaming fire, my bones into
coals of burning juniper, the light of my eyelids into splendour of lightnings, my eyeballs into fire-brands, the hair of my head
into dot flames, all my limbs into wings of
burning fire and the whole of my body into
glowing fire.
(2) And on my right were divisions 6 of
fiery flames, on my left fire-brands were
burning, round about me stormwind and
tempest were blowing and in front of me and
behind me was roaring of thunder with
earthquake.
FRAGMENT OF ‘ASCENSION OF
MOSES’
(1) R. Ishmael said: Said to me Metatron,
the Prince of the Presence and the prince
over all the princes and he stands befote
Him who is greater than all the Elohim. And
he goes in under the Throne of Glory. And
he has a great tabernacle of light on high.
And he brings forth the fire of deafness and
puts (it) into the ears of the Holy Chayyoth,
that they may not hear the voice of the Word
(Dibbur) that goes forth from the mouth of
the Divine Majesty.
(2) And when Moses ascended on high, he
fasted 121 fasts, till the habitations of the
chashmal were opened to him; and he saw
the heart within the heart of the Lion and he
saw the innumerable companies of the hosts
Around about him. And they desired to burn
him. But Moses prayed for mercy, first for
Israel and after that for himself: and He who
sitteth on the Merkaba opened the windows
that are above the heads of the Kerubim.
And a host of 1800 advocates and the Prince
of the Presence, Metatron, with them went
forth to meet Moses. And they took the
prayers of Israel and put them as a crown on
the head of the Holy One, blessed be He.
(3) And they said (Deut. vi. 4): "Hear, O
Israel; the Lord our God is one Lord"and
their face shone and rejoiced over
88
Shekinaand they said to Metatron: "What
are these? And to whom do they give all this
honour and glory?" And they answered: "To
the Glorious Lord of Israel". And they
spake: "Hear, O Israel: the Lord, our God, is
one Lord. To whom shall be given
abundance of honour and majesty but to
Thee YHWH, the Divine Majesty, the King,
living and eternal".
(4) In that moment spake Akatriel Yah
Yehod Sebaoth and said to Metatron, the
Prince of the Presence: "Let no prayer that
he prayeth before me return (to him) void.
Hear thou his prayer and fulfil his desire
whether (it be) great or small".
(5) Forthwith Metatron, the Prince of the
Presence, said to Moses:
"Son of Amram! Fear not, for now God
delights in thee. And ask thou u thy desire of
the Glory and Majesty. For thy face shines
from one end of the world to the other". But
Moses answered him: "(I fear) lest I bring
guiltiness upon myself". Metatron said to
him: ''Receive the letters of the oath, in (by)
which there is no breaking the covenant"
(which precludes any breach of the
covenant).
CHAPTER XVI 1
Probably additional
Metatron divested of his privilege of
presiding on a
Throne of his own on account of
Acher's misapprehension
in taking him for a second Divine
Power
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence, the Glory of all
heaven, said to me:
(1) At first I was sitting upon a great Throne
at the door of the Seventh Hall ; and I was
judging the children of heaven, the
household on high by authority of the Holy
One, blessed be He. And I divided
Greatness, Kingship, Dignity, Rulership,
Honour and Praise, and Diadem and Crown
of Glory unto all the princes of kingdoms,
while I was presiding (lit. sitting) in the
Celestial Court (Yeshiba), and the princes of
kingdoms were standing before me, on my
right and on my left by authority of the Holy
One, blessed be He.
(2) But when Acher came to behold the
vision of the Merkaba and fixed his eyes on
me, he feared and trembled before me and
his soul was affrighted even unto departing
from him, because of fear, horror and dread
of me, when he beheld me sitting upon a
throne like a king with all the ministering
angels standing by me as my servants and all
the princes of kingdoms adorned with
crowns surrounding me:
(3) in that moment he opened his mouth and
said: "Indeed, there are two Divine Powers
in heaven!" (4) Forthwith Bath Qol (the
Divine Voice) went forth from heaven from
before the Shekina and said: "Return, ye
backsliding children (Jer. iii. 22), except
Acher!"
(5) Then came 'Aniyel, the Prince, the
honoured, glorified, beloved, wonderful,
revered and fearful one, in commission from
the Holy One, blessed be He and gave me
sixty strokes with lashes of fire and made
me stand on my feet.
CHAPTER XVII
The princes of the seven heavens, of
the sun, moon,
planets and constellations and their
suites of angels
R. Ishmael said : Metatron, the angel, the
Prince of the Presence, the glory of all
heavens, said to me:
(1) Seven (are the) princes, the great,
beautiful, revered, wonderful and honoured
ones who are appointed over the seven
heavens. And these are they : MIKAEL,
GABRIEL, SHATQIEL, SHACHAQIEL,
BAKARIEL, BADARIEL, PACHRIEL.
(2) And every one of them is the prince of
the host of (one) heaven. And each one of
them is accompanied by 496,000 myriads of
ministering angels.
(3) MIKAEL, the great prince, is appointed
over the seventh heaven, the highest one,
which is in the 'Araboth. GABRIEL, the
89
prince of the host, is appointed over the
sixth heaven which is in Makon.
SHATAQIEL, prince of the host, is
appointed over the fifth heaven which is in
Ma'on.
SHAHAQi'EL, prince of the host, is
appointed over the fourth heaven which is in
Zebul.
BADARIEL, prince of the host, is appointed
over the third heaven which is in Shehaqim.
BARAKIEL, prince of the host, is appointed
over the second heaven which is in the
height of (Merom) Raqia.
PAZRIEL, prince of the host, is appointed
over the first heaven which is in Wilon,
which is in Shamayim.
(4) Under them is GALGALLIEL, the
prince who is appointed over the globe
(galgal) of the sun, and with him are 96
great and honoured angels who move the
sun in Raqia'.
(5)Under them is 'OPHANNIEL, the prince
who is set over the globe ('ophari) of the
moon. And with him are 88 angels who
move the globe of the moon 354 thousand
parasangs every night at the time when the
moon stands in the East at its turning point.
And when is the moon sitting in the East at
its turning point? Answer: in the fifteenth
day of every month.
(6) Under them is RAHATIEL, the prince
who is appointed over the constellations.
And he is accompanied by 72 great and
honoured angels. And why is he called
RAHATIEL? Because he makes the stars
run (marhit) in their orbits and courses 339
thousand parasangs every
night from the East to the West, and from
the West to the East. For the Holy One,
blessed be He, has made a tent for all of
them, for the sun, the moon, the planets and
the stars in which they travel at night from
the West to the East.
(7) Under them is KOKBIEL, the prince
who is appointed over all the planets. And
with him are 365,000 myriads of ministering
angels, great and honoured ones who move
the planets from city to city and from
province to province in the Raqia' of
heavens.
(8) And over them are SEVENTY-TWO
PRINCES OF KINGDOMS on high
corresponding to the 72 tongues of the
world. And all of them are crowned with
royal crowns and clad in royal garments and
wrapped in royal cloaks. And all of them are
riding on royal horses and they are holding
royal sceptres in their hands. And before
each one of them when he is travelling in
Raqia' , royal servants are running with great
glory and majesty even as on earth they
(princes) are travelling in chariot(s) with
horsemen and great armies and in glory and
greatness with praise, song and honour.
CHAPTER XVIII
The order of ranks of the angels
and the homage
received by the higher ranks from
the lower ones
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence, the glory of all
heaven, said to me:
(1) THE ANGELS OF THE FIRST
HEAVEN, when(ever) they see their prince,
they dismount from their horses and fall on
their faces.
And THE PRINCE OF THE FIRST
HEAVEN, when he sees the prince of the
second heaven, he dismounts, removes the
crown of glory from his head and falls on
his face.
And THE PRINCE OF THE SECOND
HEAVEN, when he sees the Prince of the
third heaven, he removes the crown of glory
from his head and falls on his face.
And THE PRINCE OF THE THIRD
HEAVEN, when he sees the prince of the
fourth heaven, he removes the crown of
glory from his head and falls on his face.
And THE PRINCE OF THE FOURTH
HEAVEN, when he sees the prince of the
fifth heaven, he removes the crown of glory
from his head and falls on his face.
xAnd THE PRINCE OF THE FIFTH
HEAVEN, when he sees the prince of the
sixth heaven, he removes the crown of glory
from his head and falls on his face.
And THE PRINCE OF THE SIXTH
HEAVEN, when he sees the prince of the
90
seventh heaven, he removes the crown of
glory from his head and falls on his face.
(2) And THE PRINCE OF THE SEVENTH
HEAVEN, when he sees THE SEVENTYTWO PRINCES OF KINGDOMS, he
removes the crown of glory from his head
and falls on his face.
2
(3) And the seventy-two princes of
kingdoms, when they see THE DOOR
KEEPERS OF THE FIRST HALL IN THE
ARABOTH RAQIA in the highest, they
remove the royal crown from their head and
fall on their faces.
3And THE DOOR KEEPERS OF THE
FIRST HALL, when they see the door
keepers of the second Hall, they remove the
crown of glory from their head and fall on
their faces.
And THE DOOR KEEPERS OF THE
SECOND HALL, when they see the door
keepers of the third Hall, they remove the
crown of glory from their head and fall on
their faces.
And THE DOOR KEEPERS OF THE
THIRD HALL, when they see the door
keepers of the fourth Hall, they remove the
crown of glory from their head and fall on
their faces.
And THE DOOR KEEPERS OF THE
FOURTH HALL, when they see the door
keepers of the fifth Hall, they remove the
crown of glory from their head and fall on
their faces.
And THE DOOR KEEPERS OF THE
FIFTH HALL, when they see the door
keepers of the sixth Hall, they remove the
crown of glory from their head and fall on
their faces.
And THE DOOR KEEPERS OF THE
SIXTH HALL, when they see the DOOR
KEEPERS OF THE SEVENTH HALL, they
remove the crown of glory from their head
and fall on their faces.
(4) And the door keepers of the seventh
Hall, when they see THE FOUR GREAT
PRINCES, the honoured ones, WHO ARE
APPOINTED OVER THE FOUR CAMPS
OF SHEKINA, they remove the crown(s) of
glory from their head and fall on their faces.
(5) And the four great princes, when they
see TAG'AS, the prince, great and honoured
with song (and) praise, at the head of all
thechildren of heaven, they remove the
crown of glory from their head
and fall on their faces.
(6) And Tag' as, the great and honoured
prince, when he sees BARATTIEL, the
great prince of three fingers in the height of
'Araboth, the highest heaven, he removes the
crown of glory from his head and falls on
his face.
(7) And Barattiel, the great prince, when he
sees HAMON, the great prince, the fearful
and honoured, pleasant and terrible one who
maketh all the children of heaven to tremble,
when the time draweth nigh (that is set) for
the saying of the '(Thrice) Holy', as it is
written (Isa. xxxiii. 3): "At the noise of the
tumult (hamon) the peoples are fled; at the
lifting up of thyself the nations are
scattered" he removes the crown of glory
from his head and falls on his face.
(8) And Hamon, the great prince, when he
sees TUTRESIEL, the great prince, he
removes the crown of glory from his head
and falls on his face.
(9) And Tutresiel H', the great prince, when
he sees ATRUGIEL, the great prince, he
removes the crown of glory from his head
and falls on his face.
(10) And Atrugiel the great prince, when he
sees NA'ARIRIEL H', the great prince, he
removes the crown of glory from his head
and falls on his face.
(n) And Na'aririel H', the great prince, when
he sees SASNIGIEL H’, the great prince, he
removes the crown of glory from his head
and falls on his face.
(12) And Sasnigiel H', when he sees
ZAZRIEL H', the great prince, he removes
the crown of glory from his head and falls
on his face.
(13) And Zazriel H', the prince, when he
sees GEBURATIEL H', the prince, he
removes the crown of glory from his head
and falls on his face.
(14) And Geburatiel H', the prince, when he
sees 'ARAPHIEL H', the prince, he removes
the crown of glory from his head and falls
on his face.
(15) And 'Araphiel H', the prince, when he
sees 'ASHRUYLU, the prince, who presides
in all the sessions of the children of heaven,
91
he removes the crown of glory from his head
and falls on his face.
(16) And Ashruylu H, the prince, when he
sees GALLISUR H', THE PRINCE, WHO
REVEALS ALL THE SECRETS OF THE
LAW (Tora), he removes the crown of glory
from his head and falls on his face.
(17) And Gallisur H', the prince, when he
sees ZAKZAKIEL H', the prince who is
appointed to write down the merits of Israel
on the Throne of Glory, he removes the
crown of glory from his head and falls on
his face.
(18) And Zakzakiel H', the great prince,
when he sees 'ANAPHIEL H', the prince
who keeps the keys of the heavenly Halls,
he removes the crown of glory from his head
and falls on his face. Why is he called by the
name of 'Anaphiel ? Because the bough of
his honour and majesty and his crown and
his splendour and his brilliance covers
(overshadows) all the chambers of 'Araboth
Raqia on high even as the Maker of the
World (doth overshadow them). Just as it is
written with regard to the Maker of the
World (Hab. iii. 3): "His glory covered the
heavens, and the earth was full of his
praise", even so do the honour and majesty
of 'Anaphiel cover all the glories of 'Araboth
the highest.
(19) And when he sees SOTHER 'ASHIEL
H', the prince, the great, fearful and
honoured one, he removes the crown of
glory from his head and falls on his face.
Why is he called Sother Ashiel? Because he
is appointed over the four heads of the fiery
river over against the Throne of Glory; and
every single prince who goes out or enters
before the Shekina, goes out or enters only
by his permission.
For the seals of the fiery river are entrusted
to him. And furthermore, his height is 7000
myriads of parasangs. And he stirs up the
fire of the river ; and he goes out and enters
before the Shekina to expound what is
written (recorded) concerning the
inhabitants of the world. According as it is
written (Dan. vii. 10) : "the judgement was
set, and the books were opened".
(20) And Sother 'Ashiel the prince, when he
sees SHOQED CHOZI, the great prince, the
mighty, terrible and honoured one, he
removes the crown of glory from his head
and falls upon his face.
And why is he called Shoqed Chozi?
Because he weighs all the merits (of man) in
a balance in the presence of the Holy One,
blessed be He.
(21) Andwhen he sees ZEHANPURYU
H',the great prince, the mighty and terrible
one, honoured, glorified and feared in all the
heavenly household, he removes the crown
of glory from his head and falls on his face.
Why is he called Zehanpuryu? Because he
rebukes the fiery river and pushes it back to
its place.
(22) Andwhen he sees 'AZBUGA H', the
great prince, glorified, revered, honoured,
adorned, wonderful, exalted, beloved and
feared among allthe great princes who know
the mystery of the Throne of Glory, he
removes the crown of glory from his head
and falls on his face. Why is he called
'Azbuga? Because in the future he will gird
(clothe) the righteous and pious of the world
with the garments of life and wrap them in
the cloak of life, that they may live in them
an eternal life.
(23) And when he sees the two great
princes, the strong and glorified ones who
are standing above him, he removes the
crown of glory from his head and falls on
his face. And these are the names of the two
princes:
SOPHERIEL H' (WHO) KILLETH,
(Sopheriel H' the Killer), the great prince,
the honoured, glorified, blameless,
venerable, ancient and mighty one; (and)
SOPHERIEL H' (WHO) MAKETH ALIVE
(Sopheriel H' the Lifegiver), the great
prince, the honoured, glorified, blameless,
ancient and mighty one.
(24) Why is he called Sopheriel H' who
killeth (Sopheriel H' the Killer)? Because he
is appointed over the books of the dead : [so
that] everyone, when the day of his death
draws nigh, he writes him in the books of
the dead.
Why is he called Sopheriel H' who maketh
alive (Sopheriel H' the Lifegiver)? Because
he is appointed over the books of the living
(of life), so that every one whom the Holy
One, blessed be He, will bring into life, he
92
writes him in the book of the living (of life),
by authority of MAQOM. Thou might
perhaps say: "Since the Holy One, blessed
be He, is sitting on a throne, they also are
sitting when writing". (Answer): The
Scripture teaches us (1 Kings xxii. 19, 2
Chron. xviii. 18) : "And all the host of
heaven are standing by him ".
"The host of heaven " (it is said) in order to
show us, that even the Great Princes, none
like whom there is in the high heavens, do
not fulfil the requests of the Shekina
otherwise than standing. But how is it
(possible that) they (are able to) write, when
they are standing?
It is like this :
(25) One is standing on the wheels of the
tempest and the other is standing on the
wheels of the storm-wind.
The one is clad in kingly garments, the other
is clad in kingly garments.
The one is wrapped in a mantle of majesty
and the other is wrapped in a mantle of
majesty.
The one is crowned with a royal crown, and
the other is crowned with a royal crown.
The one's body is full of eyes, and the
other's body is full of eyes.
The appearance of one is like unto the
appearance of lightnings, and the appearance
of the other is like unto the appearance of
lightnings.
The eyes of the one are like the sun in its
might, and the eyes of the other are like the
sun in its might.
The one's height is like the height of the
seven heavens, and the other's height is like
the height of the seven heavens.
The wings of the one are as (many as) the
days of the year, and the wings of the other
are as (many as) the days of the year.
The wings of the one extend over the
breadth of Raqia', and the wings of the other
extend over the breadth of Raqia.
The lips of the one, are as the gates of the
East, and the lips of the other are as the
gates of the East.
The tongue of the one is as high as the
waves of the sea, and the tongue of the other
is as high as the waves of the sea.
From the mouth of the one a flame goes
forth, and from the mouth of the other a
flame goes forth.
From the mouth of the one there go forth
lightnings and from the mouth of the other
there go forth lightnings.
From the sweat of the one fire is kindled,
and from the perspiration of the other fire is
kindled.
From the one's tongue a torch is burning,
and from the tongue of the other a torch is
burning.
On the head of the one there is a sapphire
stone, and upon the head of the other there is
a sapphire stone.
On the shoulders of the one there is a wheel
of a swift cherub, and on the shoulders of
the other there is a wheel of a swift cherub.
One has in his hand a burning scroll, the
other has in his hand a burning scroll.
The one has in his hand a flaming style, the
other has in his hand a flaming style.
The length of the scroll is 3000 myriads of
parasangs ; the size of the style is 3OOO
myriads of parasangs; the size of every
single letter that they write is 365 parasangs.
CHAPTER XIX
Rikbiel, the prince of the wheels of
the Merkaba. The
surroundings of the Merkaba. The
commotion among
the angelic hosts at the time of the
Qedushsha
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me :
(1) Above 2 these three angels, these great
princes there is one Prince, distinguished,
honoured, noble, glorified, adorned, fearful,
valiant, strong, great, magnified, glorious,
crowned, wonderful, exalted, blameless,
beloved, lordly, high and lofty, ancient and
mighty, like unto whom there is none among
the princes. His name is RIKBIEL H', the
great and revered Prince who is standing by
the Merkaba.
(2) And why is he called RIKBIEL?
Because he is appointed over the wheels of
93
the Merkaba, and they are given in his
charge.
(3) And how many are the wheels? Eight;
two in each direction. And there are four
winds compassing them round about. And
these are their names: "the Storm-Wind",
"the Tempest", "the Strong Wind", and "the
Wind of Earthquake".
(4) And under them four fieryrivers are
continually running, one fiery river on each
side. And round about them, between the
rivers, four clouds are planted (placed), and
these they are: "clouds of fire", "clouds of
lamps", "clouds of coal", "clouds of
brimstone" and they are standing over
against [their] wheels.
(5) And the feet of the Chayyoth are resting
upon the wheels. And between one wheel
and the other earthquake is roaring and
thunder is thundering.
(6) And when the time draws nigh for the
recital of the Song, (then) the multitudes of
wheels are moved, the multitude of clouds
tremble, all the chieftains (shallishim) are
made afraid, all the horsemen (parashim) do
rage, all the mighty ones (gibborim) are
excited, all the hosts (seba'im) are afrighted,
all the troops (gedudim) are in fear, all the
appointed ones (memunnim) haste away, all
the princes (sarim) and armies (chayyelim)
are dismayed, all the servants (mesharetim)
do faint and all the angels (mal'akim) and
divisions (degalim) travail with pain.
(7) And one wheel makes a sound to be
heard to the other and one Kerub to another,
one Chayya. to another, one Seraph to
another (saying) (Ps. Ixviii. 5) "Extol to him
that rideth in 'Araboth, by his name Jah and
rejoice before him!"
CHAPTER XX
CHAYYLIEL, the prince of the
Chayyoth
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me :
(1) Above these there is one great and
mighty prince. His name is CHAYYLIEL
H', a noble and revered prince, a glorious
and mighty prince, a great and revered
prince, a prince before whom all the children
of heaven do tremble, a prince who is able to
swallow up the whole earth in one moment
(at a mouthful).
(2) And why is he called CHAYYLIEL H'?
Because he is appointed over the Holy
Chayyoth and smites the Chayyoth with
lashes of fire: and glorifies them, when they
give praise and glory and rejoicing and he
causes them to make haste to say "Holy" and
"Blessed be the Glory of H' from his place!"
(i.e. the Qedushshd).
CHAPTER XXI
The Chayyoth
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me :
(1) Four (are) the Chayyoth corresponding
to the four winds. Each Chayya is as the
space of the whole world. And each one has
four faces ; and each face is as the face of
the East.
(2) Each one has four wings and each wing
is like the cover (roof) of the universe.
(3) And each one has faces in the middle of
faces and wings in the middle of wings. The
size of the faces is (as the size of) 248 faces,
and the size of the wings is (as the size of)
365 wings.
(4) And every one is crowned with 2000
crowns on his head. And each crown is like
unto the bow in the cloud. And its splendour
is like unto the splendour of the globe of the
sun. And the sparks that go forth from every
one are like the splendour of the morning
star (planet Venus) in the East.
CHAPTER XXII 1
KERUBIEL, the Prince of the
Kerubim.
Description of the Kerubim
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me :
(1) Above these la there is one prince, noble,
wonderful, strong, and praised with all kinds
of praise. His name is KERUBIEL H', a
mighty prince, full of power and strength a
prince of highness, and Highness (is) with
him, a righteous prince, and righteousness
(is) with him, a holy prince, and holiness (is)
94
with him, a prince glorified in (by) thousand
hosts, exalted by ten thousand armies.
(2) At his wrath the earth trembles, at his
anger the camps are moved, from fear of
him the foundations are shaken, at his
rebuke the 'Araboth do tremble.
(3) His stature is full of (burning) coals. The
height of his stature is as the height of the
seven heavens the breadth of his stature is as
the wideness of the seven heavens and the
thickness of his stature is as the seven
heavens.
(4) The opening of his mouth is like a lamp
of fire. His tongue is a consuming fire. His
eyebrows are like unto the splendour of the
lightning. His eyes are like sparks of
brilliance. His countenance is like a burning
fire.
(5) And there is a crown of holiness upon
his head on which (crown) the Explicit
Name is graven, and lightnings go forth
from it. And the bow of Shekina is between
his shoulders.
(6) And his sword is like unto a lightning;
and upon his loins there are arrows like unto
a flame, and upon his armour and shield
there is a consuming fire, and upon his neck
there are coals of burning juniper and (also)
round about him (there are coals of burning
juniper).
(7) And the splendour of Shekina is on his
face ; and the horns of majesty on his
wheels; and a royal diadem upon his skull.
(8) And his body is full of eyes. And wings
are covering the whole of his high stature
(lit. the height of his stature is all wings).
(9) On his right hand a flame is burning, and
on his left a fire is glowing; and coals are
burning from it. And firebrands go forth
from his body. And lightnings are cast forth
from his face. With him there is alway
thunder upon (in) thunder, by his side there
is ever earthquake upon (in) earthquake.
(10) And the two princes of the Merkaba are
together with him.
(11) Why is he called KERUBIEL H', the
Prince. Because he is appointed over the
chariot of the Kerubim. And the mighty
Kerubim are given in his charge. And he
adorns the crowns on their heads and
polishes the diadem upon their skull.
(12)He magnifies the glory of their
appearance. And he glorifies the beauty of
their majesty. And he increases the greatness
of their honour. He causes the song of their
praise to be sung. He intensifies their
beautiful strength. He causes the brilliance
of their glory to shine forth. He beautifies
their goodly mercy and lovingkindness. He
frames the fairness of their radiance. He
makes their merciful beauty even more
beautiful. He glorifies their upright majesty.
He extols the order of their praise, to
stablish the dwellingplace of him "who
dwelleth on the Kerubim".
(13) And the Kerubim are standing by the
Holy Chayyoth, and their wings are raised
up to their heads (lit. are as the height of
their heads)
and Shekina is (resting) upon them
and the brillianceof the Glory is upon their
faces
and song and praise in their mouth
and their hands are under their wings
and their feet are covered by their wings
and horns of glory are upon their heads
and the splendour of Shekina on their face
and Shekina is (resting) upon them
and sapphire stones are round about them
and columns of fire on their four sides
and columns of firebrands beside them.
(14) There is one sapphire on one side and
another sapphire on another side and under
the sapphires
there are coals of burning juniper.
(15) And one Kerub is standing in each
direction but the wings of the Kerubim
compass each other above their skulls in
glory; and they spread them to sing with
them a song to him that inhabiteth the
clouds and to praise with them the fearful
majesty of the king of kings.
(16) And KERUBIEL H', the prince who is
appointed over them, he arrays them in
comely, beautiful and pleasant orders and he
exalts them in all manner of exaltation,
dignity and glory. And he hastens them in
glory and might to do the will of their
Creator every moment. For above their lofty
heads abides continually the glory of the
high king "who dwelleth on the Kerubim".
95
CHAPTER XXII b
(ADDITIONAL)
(1) And there is a court before the Throne of
Glory,
(2) which no seraph nor angel can enter, and
it is 36,000 myriads of parasangs, as it is
written (Is.vi.2): "and the Seraphim are
standing above him" (the last word of the
scriptural passage being 'Lamech-Vav’
[numerical value: 36]).
(3) As the numerical value Lamech-Vav
(36) the number of the bridges there.
(4) And there are 24 myriads of wheels of
fire. And the ministering angels are 12,000
myriads. And there are 12,000 rivers of hail,
and 12,000 treasuries of snow. And in the
seven Halls are chariots of fire and flames,
without reckoning, or end or searching.
R. Ishmael said to me: Metatron, the
angel, the Prince of the Presence, said to
me:
(1) How are the angels standing on high? Pie
said: Like a bridge that is placed over a river
so that every one can pass over it, likewise a
bridge is placed from the beginning of the
entry to the end.
(2) And three ministering angels surround it
and utter a song before YHWH, the God of
Israel. And there are standing before it lords
of dread and captains of fear, thousand times
thousand and ten thousand times ten
thousand in number and they sing praise and
hymns before YHWH, the God of Israel.
(3) Numerous bridges are there: bridges of
fire and numerous bridges of hail. Also
numerous rivers of hail, numerous treasuries
of snow and numerous wheels offire.
(4) And how many are the ministering
angels? 12,000 myriads: six (thousand
myriads) above and six (thousand myriads]
below. And 12,000 are the treasuries of
snow, six above and six below. And 24
myriads of wheels of fire, 12 (myriads]
above and 12 (myriads] below. And they
surround the bridges and the rivers of fire
and the rivers of hail. And there are
numerous ministering angels, forming
entries, for all the creatures that are standing
in the midst thereof, corresponding to (over
against) the paths of Raqia Shamayim.
(5) What doeth YHWH, the God of Israel,
the King of Glory? The Great and Fearful
God, mighty in strength, doth cover his face.
(6) In Araboth are 660,000 myriads of
angels of glory standing over against the
Throne of Glory and the divisions offlaming
fire. And the King of Glory doth cover His
face; for else the (Araboth Raqia1 would be
rent asunder in its midst because of the
majesty, splendour, beauty, radiance,
loveliness, brilliancy, brightness and
excellency of the appearance of (the Holy
One,) blessed be He.
(7) There are numerous ministering
angelsperforming his will, numerous kings,
numerous princes in the 'Araboth of his
delight, angels who are revered among the
rulers in heaven, distinguished, adorned with
song and bringing love to remembrance:
(who) are affrighted by the splendour of the
Shekina, and their eyes are dazzled by the
shining beauty of their King, their faces
grow black and their strength doth fail.
(8) There go forth rivers ofjoy, streams of
gladness, rivers of rejoicing, streams of
triumph, rivers of love, streams of friendship
(another reading:) of commotion and they
flow over and go forth before the Throne of
Glory and wax great and go through the
gates of the paths of 'Araboth Raqia at the
voice of the shouting and musick of the
CHAYYOTH, at the voice of the rejoicing
of the timbrels of his 'OPHANNIM and at
the melody of the cymbals of His Kerubim.
And they wax great and go forth with
commotion with the sound of the hymn:
"HOLY, HOLY, HOLY, IS THE LORD OF
HOSTS; THE WHOLE EARTH IS FULL
OF HIS GLORY!"
CHAPTER XXII c
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Prince of
the Presence said to me:
(1) What is the distance between one bridge
and another? 12 myriads ofparasangs. Their
ascent is 12 myriads of parasangs, and their
descent 12 myriads of parasangs.
96
(2) (The distance) between the rivers of
dread and the rivers offear is 22 myriads of
parasangs; between the rivers of hail and the
rivers of darkness 36 myriads of parasangs;
between the chambers of lightnings and the
clouds of compassion 42 myriads of
parasangs; between the clouds of
compassion and the Merkaba 84 myriads
ofparasangs; between the Merkaba and the
Kerubim 148 myriads of parasangs; between
the Kerubim and the 'Ophannim 24 myriads
of parasangs; between the Ophannim and the
chambers of chambers 24 myriads of
parasangs; between the chambers of
chambers and the Holy Chayyoth 40,000
myriads of parasangs; between one wing (of
the Chayyoth) and another12 myriads of
parasangs; and the breadth of each one wing
is of that same measure; and the distance
between the Holy Chayyoth and the Throne
of Glory is 30,000 myriads of parasangs.
(3) And from the foot of the Throne to the
seat there are 40,000 myriads of parasangs.
And the name of Him that sitteth on it: let
the name be sanctified!
(4) And the arches of the Bow are set above
the 'Araboth, and they are 1000 thousands
and 10,000 times ten thousands (of
parasangs) high. Their measure is after the
measure of the 'Irin and Qaddishin
(Watchers and Holy Ones). As it is written
(Gen. ix. 13) "My bow I have set in the
cloud". It is not written here "I will set" but
"I have set", (i.e.) already; clouds that
surround the Throne of Glory. As His clouds
pass by, the angels of hail (turn into)
burning coal.
(5) And a fire of the voice goes down from
by the Holy Chayyoth. And because of the
breath of that voice they "run" (Ezek. i. 14)
to another place, fearing lest it command
them to go; and they "return" lest it injure
them from the other side. Therefore "they
run and return" (Ezek. i. 14).
(6) And these arches of the Bow are more
beautiful and radiant than the radiance of the
sun during the summer solstice. And they
are whiter than a flaming fire and they are
great and beautiful.
(7) Above the arches of the Bow are the
wheels of the 'Ophannim. Their height is
1000 thousand and 10,000 times 10,000
units of measure after the measure of the
Seraphim and the Troops (Gedudim).
CHAPTER XXIII
The winds blowing
 under the wings of the Kerubim
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me :
(1) There are numerous winds blowing
under the wings of the Kerubim.
There blows "the Brooding Wind", as it is
written (Gen. i. 2): " and the wind of God
was brooding upon the face of the waters ".
(2) There blows "the Strong Wind", as it is
said (Ex. xiv. 21): "and the Lord caused the
sea to go back by a strong east wind all that
night".
(3) There blows "the East Wind"as it is
written (Ex. x. 13): "the east wind brought
the locusts".
(4) There blows "the Wind of Quails" as it is
written (Num. xi. 31): "And there went forth
a wind from the Lord and brought quails".
(5) There blows "the Wind of Jealousy" as it
is written (Num.v.14): "And the wind of
jealousy came upon him".
(6) There blows the "Wind of Earthquake"
as it is written (i Kings .xix. 1 1): "and after
that the wind of the earthquake ; but the
Lord was not in the earthquake".
(7) There blows the "Wind of H' " as it is
written (Ex. xxxvii. i) : "and he carried me
out by the wind of H' and set me down".
(8) There blows the "Evil Wind " as it is
written (i Sam. xvi. 23): "and the evil wind
departed from him".
(9) There blow the "Wind of Wisdom" 5and
the "Wind of Understanding" and the "Wind
of Knowledge" and the "Wind of the Fear of
H'" as it is written (Is. xi. 2): "And the wind
of H'shall rest upon him; the wind of
wisdom and understanding, the wind of
counsel and might, the wind of knowledge
and of the fear.
(10) There blows the "Wind of Rain", as it is
written (Prov. xxv. 23): "the north wind
bringeth forth rain".
(11) There blows the "Wind of Lightnings ",
as it is written (Jer.x.13, li. 16): "he maketh
97
lightnings for the rain and bringeth forth the
wind out of his treasuries ".
(12)There blows the "Wind, Breaking the
Rocks", as it is written (i Kings xix. n): "the
Lord passed by and a great and strong wind
(rent the mountains and brake in pieces the
rocks before the Lord)".
(13) There blows the "Wind of Assuagement
of the Sea", as it is written (Gen. viii. i):
"and God made a wind to pass over the
earth, and the waters assuaged".
(14) There blows the "Wind of Wrath", as it
is written (Job i. 19) : "and behold there
came a great wind from the wilderness and
smote the four corners of the house and it
fell".
(15) There blows the " Storm-Wind ", as it is
written (Ps. cxlviii. 8) : "Storm-wind,
fulfilling his word".
(16) And Satan is standing among these
winds, for "storm-wind " is nothing else but
"Satan", and all these winds do not blow but
under the wings of the Kerubim, as it is
written (Ps. xviii. n) : "and he rode upon a
cherub and did fly, yea, and he flew swiftly
upon the wings of the wind".
(17) And whither go all these winds? The
Scripture teaches us, that they go out from
under the wings of the Kerubim and descend
on the globe of the sun, as it is written (Eccl.
i. 6) : " The wind goeth toward the south and
turneth about unto the north ; it turneth
about continually in its course and the wind
14 returneth again to its circuits ". And from
the globe of the sun they return and descend
upon the rivers and the seas, upon] the
mountains and upon the hills, as it is written
(Am.iv.13): "For lo, he that formeth the
mountains and createth the wind".
(18) And from the mountains and the hills
they return and descend to the seas and the
rivers ; and from the seas and the rivers they
return and descend upon (the) cities and
provinces ; and from the cities and provinces
they return and descend into the Garden, and
from the Garden they return and descend to
Eden, as it is written (Gen.iii. 8): "walking
in the Garden in the wind of day". And in
the midst of the Garden they join together
and blow from one side to the other and are
perfumed with the spices of the Garden even
from \ts remotest parts, until they separate
from each other, and, filled
with the scent of the pure spices, they bring
the odour from the remotest parts of Eden
and the spices of the Garden to the righteous
and godly who in the time to come shall
inherit the Garden of Eden and the Tree of
Life, as it is written (Cant. iv. 16) : "Awake,
O north wind; and come thou south; blow
upon my garden, that the spices thereof may
flow out. Let my beloved come into his
garden and eat his precious fruits".
CHAPTER XXIV
The different chariots of the Holy
One, blessed be He
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence, the glory of all
heaven, said to me :
(1) Numerous chariots has the Holy One,
blessed be He:
He has the "Chariots of (the) Kerubim", as it
is written (Ps.xviii.11, 2 Sam.xxii.11): "And
he rode upon a cherub and did fly".
(2) He has the "Chariots of Wind", as it is
written (ib.) : "and he flew swiftly upon the
wings of the wind ".
(3) He has the "Chariots of (the) Swift
Cloud", as it is written (Is. xix. i): "Behold,
the Lord rideth upon a swift cloud".
(4) He has "the Chariots of Clouds", as it is
written (Ex. xix. 9): "Lo, I come unto thee in
a cloud".
(5) He has the "Chariots of the Altar", as it is
written (Am. ix. i) :"I saw the Lord standing
upon the Altar".
(6) He has the "Chariots of Ribbotaim", as it
is written (Ps.Ixviii. 18) : "The chariots of
God are Ribbotaim ; thousands of angels ".
(7) He has the "Chariots of the Tent", as it is
written (Deut.xxxi. 15) : "And the Lord
appeared in the Tent in a pillar of cloud ".
(8) He has the "Chariots of the Tabernacle",
as it is written (Lev. i. 1): "And the Lord
spake unto him out of the tabernacle".
(9) He has the "Chariots of the Mercy-Seat",
as it is written (Num. vii. 89): "then he heard
the Voice speaking unto him from upon the
mercy-seat".
98
(10) He has the "Chariots of Sapphire
Stone", as it is written (Ex. xxiv. 10) : "and
there was under his feet as it were a paved
work of sapphire stone".
(11) He has the "Chariots of Eagles ", as it is
written (Ex. xix. 4) :"I bare you on eagles'
wings". Eagles literally are not meant here
but "they that fly swiftly as eagles".
(12)He has the "chariots of Shout", as it is
written (Ps. xlvii. 6) :"God is gone up with a
shout".
(13) He has the "Chariots of 'Araboth", as it
is written (Ps.Ixviii. 5): "Extol Him that
rideth upon the 'Araboth".
(14) He has the "Chariots of Thick Clouds",
as it is written (Ps. civ. 3): "who maketh the
thick clouds His chariot".
(15) He has the "Chariots of the Chayyoth",
as it is written (Ezek. i. 14) : "and the
Chayyoth
ran and returned". They run by permission
and return by permission, for Shekina is
above their heads.
(16) He has the "Chariots of Wheels
(Galgallim)", as it is written (Ezek. x. 2):
"And he said: Go in between the whirling
wheels".
(17) lie has the "Chariots of a Swift Kerub",
as it is written (Ps.xviii.10 & Is.xix.1):
"riding on a swift cherub".
And at the time when He rides on a swift
kerub, as he sets one of His feet upon him,
before he sets the other foot upon his back,
he looks through eighteen thousand worlds
at one glance. And he discerns and sees into
them all and knows what is in all of them
and then he sets down the other foot upon
him, according as it is written (Ezek. xlviii.
35): "Round about eighteen thousand".
Whence do we know that He looks through
every one of them every day? It is written
(Ps. xiv. 2): “He looked down from heaven
upon the children of men to see if there were
any that did understand,
that did seek after God".
(i8) He has the "Chariots of the 'Ophannim",
as it is written
(Ezek. x. 12): "and the 'Ophannim were full
of eyes round about". 12
(19) He has the "Chariots of His Holy
Throne", as it is written (Ps. xlvii. 8) :" God
sitteth upon his holy throne ".
(20) He has the "chariots of the Throne of
Yah", as it is written (Ex. xvii. 16) :
"Because a hand is lifted up upon the
Throne of Jah".
(21) He has the "Chariots of the Throne of
Judgement", as it is written (Is. v. 16): "but
the Lord of hosts shall be exalted in
judgment".
(22) He has the "Chariots of the Throne of
Glory ", as it is written (Jer. xvii. 12) : "The
Throne of Glory, set on high from the
beginning, is the place of our sanctuary".
(23) He has the "Chariots of the High and
Exalted Throne", as it is written (Is. vi. i): "I
saw the Lord sitting upon the high and
exalted throne".
CHAPTER XXV
'Ophphanniel, the prince of the
'Ophannim.
Description of the 'Ophannim
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me :
(1) Above these there is one great prince,
revered, high, lordly, fearful, ancient and
strong. 'OPHPHANNIEL H is his name.
(2) He has sixteen faces, four faces on each
side,(also) hundred wings on each side. And
he has 8466 eyes, corresponding to the days
of the year. [2190 –and some say 2116- on
each side.] [2191 /2196 and sixteen on each
side.]
(3) And those two eyes of his face, in each
one of them lightnings are flashing, and
from each one of them firebrands are
burning ; and no creature is able to behold
them : for anyone who looks at them is burnt
instantly.
(4) His height is (as) the distance of 2500
years' journey. No eye can behold and no
mouth can tell the mighty power of his
strength save the King of kings, the Holy
One, blessed be He, alone.
(5) Why is he called 'OPHPHANNIEL ?
Because he is appointed over the 'Ophannim
and the 'Ophannimare given in his charge.
He stands every day and attends and
beautifies them. And he exalts and orders
their apartment and polishes their standing99
place and makes bright their dwellings,
makes their corners even and cleanses their
seats. And he waits upon them early and
late, by day and by night, to increase their
beauty, to make great their dignity and to
make them "diligent in praise of their
Creator.
(6) And all the 'Ophannim are full of eyes,
and they are all full of brightness; seventy
two sapphire stones are fixed on their
garments on their right side and seventy two
sapphire stones are fixed on their garments
on their left side.
(7) And four carbuncle stones are fixed on
the crown of every single one, the splendour
of which proceeds in the four directions of
'Araboth even as the splendour of the globe
of the sun proceeds in
all the directions of the universe. And why is
it called Carbuncle (Bareqet)? Because its
splendour is like the appearance of a
lightning (Baraq). And tents of splendour,
tents of brilliance, tents of brightness as of
sapphire and carbuncle inclose them because
of the shining appearance of their eyes.
CHAPTER XXVI
SERAPHIEL, the Prince of the
Seraphim.
Description of the Seraphim
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me :
(1) Above these there is one prince,
wonderful, noble, great, honourable, mighty,
terrible, a chief and leader 1 and a swift
scribe, glorified, honoured and beloved.
(2) He is altogether filled with splendour,
full of praise and shining; and he is wholly
full of brilliance, of light and of beauty; and
the whole of him is filled with goodliness
and greatness.
(3) His countenance is altogether like (that
of) angels, but his body is like an eagle's
body.
(4) His splendour is like unto lightnings, his
appearance like fire brands, his beauty like
unto sparks, his honour like fiery coals, his
majesty like chashmals, his radiance like the
light of the planet Venus.
The image of him is like unto the Greater
Light. His height is as the seven heavens.
The light from his eyebrows is like the
sevenfold light.
(5) The sapphire stone upon his head is as
great as the whole universe and like unto the
splendour of the very heavens in radiance.
(6) His body is full of eyes like the stars of
the sky, innumerable and unsearchable.
Every eye is like the planet Venus. Yet,
there are some of them like the Lesser Light
and some of them like unto the Greater
Light. From his ankles to his knees (they
are) like unto stars of lightning, from his
knees to his thighs like unto the planet
Venus, from his thighs to his loins like unto
the moon, from his loins to his neck like the
sun, from his neck to his skull like unto the
Light Imperishable. (Cf. Zeph. iii. 5.)
(7) The crown on his head is like unto the
splendour of the Throne of Glory. The
measure of the crown is the distance of 502
years' journey. There is no kind of
splendour, no kind of brilliance, no kind of
radiance, no kind of light in the universe but
is fixed on that crown.
(8) The name of that prince is SERAPHIEL
H''. And the crown on his head, its name is
"the Prince of Peace". And why is he called
by the name of SERAPHIEL '? Because he
is appointed over the Seraphim. And the
flaming Seraphim are given in his charge.
And he presides over them by day and by
night and teaches them song, praise,
proclamation of beauty, might and majesty;
that they may proclaim the beauty of their
King in all manner of Praise and
Sanctification (Qedushsha).
(9) How many are the Seraphim? Four,
corresponding to the four winds of the
world. And how many wings have they each
one of them? Six, corresponding to the six
days of Creation. And how
many faces have they? Each one of them
four faces.
(10) The measure of the Seraphim and the
height of each one of them correspond to the
height of the seven heavens. The size of
each wing is like the measure of all Raqia' .
The size of each face is like that of the face
of the East.
100
(11) And each one of them gives forth light
like unto the splendour of the Throne of
Glory: so that not even the Holy Chayyoth,
the honoured 'Ophannim, nor the majestic
KeruUm are able to behold it. For everyone
who beholds it, his eyes are darkened
because of its great splendour.
(12) Why are they called Seraphim?
Because they burn (saraph) the writing
tables of Satan : Every day Satan is sitting,
together with SAMMAEL, the Prince of
Rome, and with DUBBIEL, the Prince of
Persia, and they write the iniquities of Israel
on writing tables which they hand over to
the Seraphim, in order that they may present
them before the Holy One, blessed be He, so
that He may destroy Israel from the world.
But the Seraphim know from the secrets of
the Holy One, blessed be He, that he desires
not, that this people Israel should perish.
What do the Seraphim? Every day do they
receive (accept) them from the hand of
Satan and burn them in the burning fire over
against the high and exalted Throne in order
that they may not come before the Holy
One, blessed be He, at the time when he is
sitting upon the Throne of Judgement,
judging the whole world in truth.
CHAPTER XXVII
RADWERIEL, the keeper of the
Book of Records
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel of
H’, the Prince of the Presence, said to me
:
(1) Above the Seraphim there is one prince,
exalted above all the princes, wondrous
more than all the servants. His name is
RADWERIEL H' who is appointed over the
treasuries of the books.
(2) He fetches forth the Case of Writings
(with) the Book of Records in it, and brings
it before the Holy One, blessed be He. And
he breaks the seals of the case, opens it,
takes out the books and delivers them before
the Holy One, blessed be He. And the Holy
One, blessed be He, receives them of his
hand and gives them in his sight to the
Scribes, that they may read them in the
Great Beth Din (The court of justice) in the
height of 'Araboth Raqia', before the
heavenly household.
(3) And why is he called RADWERIEL?
Because out of every word that goes forth
from his mouth an angel is created : and he
stands in the songs (in the singing company)
of the ministering angels and utters a song
before the Holy One, blessed be He when
the time draws nigh for the recitation of the
(Thrice) Holy.
CHAPTER XXVIII
The 'Irin and Qaddishin
R. Ishmael said : Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me :
(1) Above all these there are four great
princes, lrin and Qaddishin by name: high,
honoured, revered, beloved, wonderful and
glorious ones, greater than all the children of
heaven. There is none like unto them among
all the celestial princes and none their equal
among all the Servants. For each one of
them is equal to all the rest together.
(2) And their dwelling is over against the
Throne of Glory, and their standing place
over against the Holy One, blessed be He,
so that the brilliance of their dwelling is a
reflection of the brilliance of the Throne of
Glory. And the splendour of their
countenance is a reflection of the splendour
of Shekina.
(3) And they are glorified by the glory of
4the Divine Majesty (Gebura) and praised
by (through) the praise of Shekina.
(4) And not only that, but the Holy One,
blessed be He, does nothing in his world
without first consulting them, but after that
he doeth it. As it is written (Dan. iv. 17) :
"The sentence is by the decree of the 'Irin
and the demand by the word of the
Qaddishin."
(5) The llrin are two and the Qaddishin are
two. And how are they standing before the
Holy One, blessed be He? It is to be
understood, that one ‘lr is standing on one
side and the other ‘lr on the other side, and
one Qaddish is standing on one side and the
other on the other side.
(6) And ever do they exalt the humble, and
they abase to the ground those that are
101
proud, and they exalt to the height those that
are humble.
(7) And every day, as the Holy One, blessed
be He, is sitting upon the Throne of
Judgement and judges the whole world, and
the Books of the Living and the Books of
the Dead are opened before Him, then all
the children of heaven are standing before
him in fear, dread, awe and trembling. At
that time, (when) the Holy One, blessed be
He, is sitting upon the Throne of Judgement
to execute judgement, his garment is white
as snow, the hair on his head as pure wool
and the whole of his cloak is like the shining
light. And he is covered with righteousness
all over as with a coat of mail.
(8) And those 'Irm and Qaddishin are
standing before him like court officers
before the judge. And they raise and argue
every case and close the case that comes
before the Holy One, blessed be He, in
judgement, according as it is written (Dan.
iv. 17) : "The sentence is by the decree of
the 'Irm and the demand by the word of the
Qaddishin"
(9) Some of them argue and others pass the
sentence in the Great Beth Din in 'Araboth.
Some of them make the requests from
before uthe Divine Majesty and some close
the cases before the Most
High. Others finish by going down and
(confirming ) executing the sentences on
earth below. According as it is written (Dan.
iv. 13 , 14) : " Behold an 'Ir and a
Qaddishcame down from heaven and cried
aloud and said thus, Hew down the tree, and
cut off his branches, shake off his leaves,
and scatter his fruit: let the beasts get away
from under it, and the fowls from his
branches ".
(10) Why are they called 'Irin and
Qaddishint By reason that they sanctify the
body and the spirit with lashes of fire on the
third day of the judgement, as it is written
(Hos. vi. 2): "After two days will he revive
us : on the third he will raise us up, and we
shall live before him."
CHAPTER XXIX
Description of a class of angels
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence,said to me:
(1) Each one of them has seventy names
corresponding to the seventy tongues of the
world. And all of them are (based) upon the
name of the Holy One, blessed be He. And
every several name is written with a flaming
style upon the Fearful Crown (Keiher Nora)
which is on the head of the high and exalted
King.
(2) And from each one of them there go
forth sparks and lightnings. And each one of
them is beset with horns of splendour round
about. From each one lights are shining
forth, and each one is surrounded by tents of
brilliance so that not even the Seraphim and
the Chayyoth who are greater than all the
children of heaven are able to behold them.
CHAPTER XXX
The 72 princes of Kingdoms and
the Prince of the World
officiating at the Great Sanhedrin
in heaven
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me:
(1) Whenever the Great Beth Din is seated
in the 'Araboth Raqia' on high there is no
opening of the mouth for anyone in the
world save those great princes who are
called H' by the name of the Holy One,
blessed be He.
(2) How many are those princes? Seventytwo princes of the kingdoms of the world
besides the Prince of the World who speaks
(pleads) in favour of the world before the
Holy One, blessed be He, every day, at the
hour when the book is opened in which are
recorded all the doings of the world,
according as it is written (Dan.vii.10) : "The
judgement was set and the books were
opened."
102
CHAPTER XXXI
(The attributes of) Justice, Mercy
and Truth
by the Throne of Judgement
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence,said to me :
(1) At the time when the Holy One, blessed
be He, is sitting on the Throne, of
Judgement, (then) Justice is standing on His
right and Mercy on His left and Truth before
His face.
(2) And when man enters before Him to
judgement,(then) there comes forth from the
splendour of the Mercy towards him as (it
were) a staff and stands in front of him.
Forthwith man falls upon his face, (and) all
the angels of destruction fear and tremble
before him, according as it is written (Is.xvi.
5): "And with mercy shall the throne be
established, and he shall sit upon it in truth."
CHAPTER XXXII
The execution ofjudgement on the
wicked. God's sword
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me :
(1) When the Holy One, blessed be He,
opens the Book half of which is fire and half
flame, (then) they go out from before Him in
every moment to execute the judgement on
the wicked by His sword
(that is) drawn forth out of its sheath and the
splendour of which shines like a lightning
and pervades the world from one end to the
other, as it is written (Is. Ixvi. 16): "For by
fire will the Lord plead (and by his sword
with all flesh)."
(2) And all the inhabitants of the world (lit.
those who come into the world) fear and
tremble before Him, when they behold His
sharpened sword like unto a lightning from
one end of the world to the other, and sparks
and flashes of the size of the stars of Raqia'
going out from it; according as it is written
(Deut. xxxii. 41):" If I whet the lightning of
my sword".
CHAPTER XXXIII
The angels of Mercy, of Peace and
of Destruction by
the Throne ofJudgement. The
scribes, (vss. i, 2)
The angels by the Throne of Glory
and the
fiery rivers under it. (vss. 3-5)
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me :
(1) At the time that the Holy One, blessed be
He, is sitting on the Throne of Judgement,
(then) the angels of Mercy are standing on
His right, the angels of Peace are standing
on His left and the angels of Destruction are
standing in front of Him.
(2) And one scribe is standing beneath Him,
and another scribe above Him.
(3) And the glorious Seraphimsurround the
Throne on its four sides with walls of
lightnings, and the 'Ophannim. surround
them with fire-brands round about the
Throne of Glory. And clouds of fire and
clouds of flames compass them to the right
and to the left; and the Holy Chayyoth carry
the Throne of Glory from below: each one
with three fingers. The measure of the
fingers of each one is 800,000 and 700 times
hundred, (and) 66,000 parasangs.
(4) And underneath the feet of the Chayyoth
seven fiery rivers are running and flowing.
And the breadth of each river is 365
thousand parasangs and its depth is 248
thousand myriads of parasangs. Its length is
unsearchable and immeasureable.
(5) And each river turns round in a bow in
the four directions of 'Araboth Raqict , and
(from there) it falls down to Ma'on and is
stayed, and from Ma1 on to Zebul, from
Zebul to Shechaqim, from Shechaqim to
Raqia' , from Raqia' to Shamayim and from
Shamayim upon the heads of the wicked
who are in Gehenna, as it is written (Jer.
xxiii. 19): "Behold a whirlwind of the Lord,
even his fury, is gone, yea, a whirling
tempest; it shall burst upon the head of the
wicked".
103
CHAPTER XXXIV
The different concentric circles
round the Chayyoth, consisting
offire, water, hailstones etc. and of
the angels uttering
the Qedushsha responsorium
R. Ishmael said: Metatron; the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me :
(1) The hoofs of the Chayyoth are
surrounded by seven clouds of burning
coals. The clouds of burning coals are
surrounded on the outside by seven walls of
flame(s). The seven walls of flame(s) are
surrounded on the outside by seven walls of
hailstones (stones of 'Et-gabish, Ezek. xiii.
11,13, xxviii. 22). The hailstones are
surrounded on the outside by xstones of hail
(stone of Barad). The stones of hail are
surrounded on the outside by stones of "the
wings of the tempest ".
The stones of "the wings of the tempest" are
surrounded on the outside by flames of fire.
The flames of fire are surrounded by the
chambers of the whirlwind. The chambers of
the whirlwind are surrounded on the outside
by the fire and the water.
(2) Round about the fire and the water are
those who utter the "Holy". Round about
those who utter the "Holy" are those who
utter the "Blessed"'. Round about those who
utter the "Blessed" are the bright clouds. The
bright clouds are surrounded on the outside
by coals of burning jumper ; and on the
outside surrounding the coals of burning
juniper there are thousand camps of fire and
ten thousand hosts of flame(s). And between
every several camp and every several host
there is a cloud, so that they may not be
burnt by the fire.
CHAPTER XXXV
The camps of angels in 'Araboth
Raqia: angels, performing the
Qedushsha
1 R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel,
the Prince of the Presence, said to me :
(1) 506 thousand myriads of camps has the
Holy One, blessed be He, in the height of
'Araboth Raqia. And each camp is
(composed of) 496 thousand angels.
(2) And every single angel, the height of his
stature is as the great sea; and the
appearance of their countenance as the
appearance of the lightning, and their eyes
as lamps of fire, and their arms and their feet
like in colour to polished brass and the
roaring voice of their words like the voice of
a multitude.
(3) And they are all standing before the
Throne of Glory in four rows. And the
princes of the army are standing at the head
of each row.
(4) And some of them utter the "Holy" and
others utter the "Blessed", some of them run
as messengers, others are standing in
attendance, according as it is written (Dan.
vii. 10): "Thousand
thousands ministered unto him, and ten
thousand times ten thousand stood before
him : the judgment was set and the books
were opened ".
(5) And in the hour, when the time draws
nigh for to say the "Holy", (then) first there
goes forth a whirlwind from before the Holy
One, blessed be He, and bursts upon the
camp of Shekina and there arises a great
commotion among them, as it is written
(Jer.xxx. 23): "Behold, the whirlwind of the
Lord goeth forth with fury, a continuing
commotion".
(6) At that moment 4thousand thousands of
them are changed into sparks, thousand
thousands of them into firebrands, thousand
thousands into flashes, thousand thousands
into flames, thousand thousands into males,
thousand thousands into females, thousand
thousands into winds, thousand thousands
into burning fires, thousand thousands into
flames, thousand thousands into sparks,
thousand thousands into chashmals of light;
until they take upon themselves the yoke of
the kingdom of heaven, the high and lifted
up, of the Creator of them all with fear,
dread, awe and trembling, with commotion,
anguish, terror and trepidation. Then they
are changed again into their former shape to
104
have the fear of their King before them
alway, as they have set their hearts on
saying the Song continually, as it is written
(Is. vi. 3): "And one cried unto another and
said (Holy, Holy, Holy, etc.)".
CHAPTER XXXVI
The angels bathe in the fiery river
before reciting the 'Song'
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me :
(1) At the time when the ministering angels
desire to say (the) Song, (then) Nehar di-Nur
(the fiery stream) rises with many thousand
thousands and myriads of myriads" (of
angels) of power and strength of fire and it
runs and passes under the Throne of Glory,
between the camps of the ministering angels
and the troops of 'Araboth.
(2) And all the ministering angels first go
down into Nehar di-Nur, and they dip
themselves in the fire and dip their tongue
and their mouth seven times ; and after that
they go up and put on the garment of
'Machaqe Samal’ and cover themselves with
cloaks of chashmal and stand in four rows
over against the Throne of Glory, in all the
heavens.
CHAPTER XXXVII
The four camps of Shekina and
their surroundings
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me :
(1) In the seven Halls there are standing four
chariots of Shekina, and before each one are
standing the four camps of Shekina.
Between each camp a river of fire is
continually flowing.
(2) Between each river there are bright
clouds [surrounding them], and between
each cloud there are put up pillars of
brimstone. Between one pillar and another
there are standing flaming wheels,
surrounding them. And between one wheel
and another there are flames of fire round
about. Between one flame and another there
are treasuries of lightnings; behind the
treasuries of lightnings are the wings of the
stormwind. Behind the wings of the stormwind are the chambers of the tempest;
behind the chambers of the tempest there are
winds, voices, thunders, sparks [upon]
sparks and earthquakes [upon] earthquakes.
CHAPTER XXXVIII
The fear that befalls all the heavens
at the sound of the
'Holy? esp. the heavenly bodies.
These appeased by the
Prince of the World
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me :
(1) At the time, when the ministering angels
utter (the Thrice) Holy, then all the pillars of
the heavens and their sockets do tremble,
and the gates of the Halls of Araboth Raqia'
are shaken and the foundations of
Shechaqim and the Universe (Tebel) are
moved, and the orders of Ma'on and the
chambers of Makon quiver, and all the
orders of Raqia and the constellations and
the planets are dismayed, and the globes of
the sun and the moon haste away and flee
out of their courses and run 12,000
parasangs and seek to throw themselves
down from heaven,
(2) by reason of the roaring voice of their
chant, and the noise of their praise and the
sparks and lightnings that go forth from their
faces; as it is written (Ps. Ixxvii. 18): "The
voice of thy thunder was in the heaven (the
lightnings lightened the world, the earth
trembled and shook) ".
(3) Until the prince of the world calls them,
saying: "Be ye quiet in your place ! Fear not
because of the ministering angels who sing
the Song before the Holy One, blessed be
He". As it is written (Job.xxxviii. 7): "When
the morning stars sang together and all the
children of heaven shouted for joy".
105
CHAPTER XXXIX
The explicit names fly offfrom the
Throne and all the
various angelic hosts prostrate
themselves before it at
the time of the Qedushsha
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me :
(1) When the ministering angels utter the
"Holy" then all the explicit names that are
graven with a flaming style on the Throne of
Glory fly off like eagles, with sixteen wings.
And they surround and
compass the Holy One, blessed be He, on
the four sides of the place of His Shekina1.
(2) And the angels of the host, and the
flaming Servants, and the mighty
'Ophannim, and the Kerubim of the Shekina,
and the Holy Chayyoth, and the Seraphim,
and the 'Er'ellim, and the Taphsarim and the
troops of consuming fire, and the fiery
armies, and the flaming hosts, and the holy
princes, adorned with crowns, clad in kingly
majesty, wrapped in glory, girt with
loftiness, 4 fall upon their faces three times,
saying: "Blessed be the name of His glorious
kingdom for ever and ever".
CHAPTER XL
The ministering angels rewarded
with crowns, when uttering
the “Holy” in its right order,
andpunished by consuming fire
if not. New ones created in the stead
of the consumed angels
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me :
(1) When the ministering angels say "Holy"
before the Holy One, blessed be He, in the
proper way, then the servants of His Throne,
the attendants of His Glory, go forth with
great mirth from under the Throne of Glory.
(2) And they all carry in their hands, each
one of them thousand thousand and ten
thousand times ten thousand crowns of stars,
similar in appearance to the planet Venus,
and put them on the ministering angels and
the great princes who utter the "Holy".
Three crowns they put on each one of them:
one crown because they say "Holy", another
crown, because they say "Holy, Holy", and a
third crown because they say "Holy, Holy,
Holy, is the Lord of Hosts" .
(3) And in the moment that they do not utter
the "Holy" in the right order, a consuming
fire goes forth from the little finger of the
Holy One, blessed be He, and falls down in
the midst of their ranksand is divided into
496 thousand parts corresponding to the four
camps of the ministering angels, and
consumes them in one moment, as it is
written (Ps. xcvii. 3): "A fire goeth before
him and burneth up his adversaries round
about".
(4) After that the Holy One, blessed be He,
opens His mouth and speaks one word and
creates others in their stead, new ones like
them. And each one stands before His
Throne of Glory, uttering the "Holy", as it is
written (Lam. iii. 23): "They are new every
morning; great is thy faithfulness”.
CHAPTER XLI
Metatron shows R. Ishmael the
letters engraved on
the Throne of Glory by which
letters everything in
heaven and earth has been created
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me :
(1) Come and behold the letters by which
the heaven and theearth were created, the
letters by which were created the mountains
and hills, the letters by which were created
the seas and rivers, the letters by which were
created the trees and herbs, the letters by
which were created the planets and the
constellations, the letters by which were
created the globe of the moon and the globe
of the sun, Orion, the Pleiades and all the
different luminaries of Raqia' .
(2) the letters by which were created the
Throne of Glory and the Wheels of the
106
Merkaba, the letters by which were created
the necessities of the worlds,
(3) the letters by which were created
wisdom, understanding, knowledge,
prudence, meekness and righteousness by
which the whole world is sustained.
(4) And I walked by his side and he took me
by his hand and raised me upon his wings
and showed me those letters, all of them,
that are graven with a flaming style on the
Throne of Glory : and sparks
go forth from them and cover all the
chambers of 'Araboth.
CHAPTER XLII
Instances of polar opposites kept in
balance by several
Divine Names and other similar
wonders
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, the Angel, the
Prince of the Presence, said to me :
(1) Come and I will show thee, where the
waters are suspended in the highest, where
fire is burning in the midst of hail, where
lightnings lighten out of the midst of snowy
mountains, where thunders are roaring in the
celestial heights, where a flame is burning in
the midst of the burning fire and where
voices make themselves heard in the midst
of thunder and earthquake.
(2) Then I went by his side and he took me
by his hand and lifted me up on his wings
and showed me all those things. I beheld the
waters suspended on high in 'Araboth Raqia'
by (force of) the name YAH 'EHYE
'ASHER 'EHYE (Jah, I am that I am),
And their fruits going down from heaven
and watering the face of the world, as it is
written (Ps.civ.13): "(He watereth the
mountains from his chambers :) the earth is
satisfied with the fruit of thy work".
(3) And I saw fire and snow and hailstone
that were mingled together within each other
and yet were undamaged, by (force of) the
name 'ESH 'OKELA (consuming fire), as it
is written (Deut. iv. 24) : "For the Lord, thy
God, is a consuming fire".
(4) And I saw lightnings that were
lightening out of mountains of snow and yet
were not damaged (quenched), by (force of)
the name YAH SUR 'OLAMIM (Jah, the
everlasting rock), as it is written (Is. xxvi.
4): "For in Jah, YHWH, the everlasting
rock".
(5) And I saw thunders and voices that were
roaring in the midst of fiety flames and were
not damaged (silenced), by (force of) the
name 'EL-SHADDAI RABBA (the Great
God Almighty) as it is written (Gen. xvii. i):
"I am God Almighty".
(6) And I beheld a flame (and) a glow
(glowing flames) that were flaming and
glowing in the midst of burning fire, and yet
were not damaged (devoured), by (force of)
the name YAD 'AL KES YAH
(the hand upon the Throne of the Lord) as it
is written (Ex. xvii. 16) : " And he said: for
the hand is upon the Throne of the Lord ".
(7) And I beheld rivers of fire in the midst of
rivers of water and they were not damaged
(quenched) by (force of) the name 'OSE
SHALOM (Maker of Peace) as it is written
(Job xxv. 2): "He maketh peace in his high
places". For he makes peace between the fire
and the water, between the hail and the fire,
between the wind and the cloud, between the
earthquake and the sparks.
CHAPTER XLIII
Metatron shows R. Ishmael the
abode of the unborn spirits
and of the spirits of the righteous
dead
R. Ishmael said: Metatron said to me:
(1) Come and I will show thee 1where are1
the spirits of the righteous that have been
created and have returned, and the spirits of
the righteous that have not yet been created.
(2) And he lifted me up to his side, took me
by his hand and lifted me up near the Throne
of Glory by the place of the Shekina ; and he
revealed the Throne of Glory to me, and he
showed me the spirits that have been created
and had returned : and they were flying
above the Throne of Glory before the Holy
One, blessed be He.
107
(3) After that I went to interpret the
following verse of Scripture and I found in
what is written (Isa.Ivii. 16): "for the spirit
clothed itself before me, and the souls I have
made" that ("for the spirit was clothed
before me") means the spirits that have been
created in the chamber of creation of the
righteous and that have returned before the
Holy One, blessed be He; (and the words:)
"and the souls I have made" refer to the
spirits 4 of the righteous that have not yet
been created in the chamber (GUPH).
CHAPTER XLIV
Metatron shows R. Ishmael the
abode of the wicked
and the intermediate in Sheol. (vss.
1-6)
The Patriarchs pray for the
deliverance of Israel
(vss. 7-10)
R. Ishmael said: Metatron, x the Angel,
the Prince of the Presence, said to me :
(1) Come and I will show thee the spirits of
the wicked and the spirits of the
intermediate where they are standing, and
the spirits of the intermediate, whither they
go down, 3and the spirits of the wicked,
where they go down.
(2) And he said to me : The spirits of the
wicked go down to She'ol by the hands of
two angels of destruction: ZA'APHIEL and
SIMKIEL are their names.
(3) SIMKIEL is appointed over the
intermediate to support them and purify
them because of the great mercy of the
Prince of the Place (Maqom). ZA'APHIEL
is appointed over the spirits of the wicked in
order to cast them down from the presence
of the Holy One, blessed be He, and from
the splendour of the Shekina to She'ol, to be
punished in the fire of Gehenna with staves
of burning coal.
(4) And I went by his side, and he took me
by his hand and showed me all of them with
his fingers.
(5) And I beheld the appearance of their
faces (and, lo, it was) as the appearance of
children of men, and their bodies like eagles.
And not only that but (furthermore) the
colour of the countenance of the
intermediate was like pale grey on account
of their deeds, for there are stains upon them
until they have become cleaned from their
iniquity in the fire.
(6) And the colour of the wicked was like
the bottom of a pot on account of the
wickedness of their doings.
(7) And I saw the spirits of the Patriarchs
Abraham Isaac and Jacob and the rest of the
righteous whom they have brought up out of
their graves and who have ascended to the
Heaven (Raqirf). And
they were praying before the Holy One,
blessed be He, saying intheir prayer: "Lord
of the Universe! How long wilt thou sit upon
(thy) Throne like a mourner in the days of
his mourning with thy right hand behind
thee 7and not7 deliver thy children and
reveal thy Kingdom in the world? And for
how long wilt thou have no pity upon thy
children who are made slaves among the
nations of the world? Nor upon thy right
hand that is behind thee wherewith thou
didst stretch out the heavens and the earth
and the heavens of heavens? When wilt thou
have compassion?"
(8) Then the Holy One, blessed be He,
answered every one of them, saying: "Since
these wicked do sin so and so, and
transgress with such and such transgressions
against me, how could I deliver my
great Right Hand in the downfall by their
hands (caused by them).
(9) In that moment Metatron called me and
spake to me: "My servant! Take the books,
and read their evil doings!" Forthwith I took
the books and read their doings and there
were to be found 36 transgressions (written
down) with regard to each wicked one and
besides, that they have transgressed all the
letters in the Tora, as it is written (Dan. ix.
u) : "Yea, all Israel have transgressed thy
Law". It is not written 'al torateka but 'et
(JIN) torateka, for they have transgressed
from 'Aleph to Taw, 4O statutes have they
transgressed for each letter.
(10) Forthwith Abraham, Isaac and Jacob
wept. Then said to them the Holy One,
blessed be He: "Abraham, my beloved,
Isaac, my Elect one, Jacob, my firstborn!
108
How can I now deliver them from among
the nations of the world?" And forthwith
MIKAEL, the Prince of Israel, cried and
wept with a loud voice and said (Ps. x. i) :
"Why standest thou afar off, O Lord?".
CHAPTER XLV
Metatron shows R. Ishmael past
andfuture events
recorded on the Curtain of the
Throne
R. Ishmael said: Metatron said to me:
(1) Come, and I will show thee the Curtain
of MAQOM (the Divine Majesty) which is
spread before the Holy One, blessed be He,
(and) whereon are graven all the generations
of the world and all their doings, both what
they have done and what they will do until
the end of all generations.
(2) And I went, and he showed it to me
pointing it out with his fingers Mike a father
who teaches his children the letters of Tora.
And I saw each generation,
the rulers of each generation,
and the heads of each generation,
the shepherds of each generation,
the oppressors (drivers) of each generation,
the keepers of each generation,
the scourgers of each generation,
the overseers of each generation,
the judges of each generation,
the court officers of each generation ,
the teachers of each generation,
 the supporters of each generation,
the chiefs of each generation,
the presidents of academies of each
generation,
the magistrates of each generation,
the princes of each generation,
the counsellors of each generation,
the nobles of each generation,
and the men of might of each generation,
the elders of each generation,
and the guides of each generation.
(3) And I saw Adam, his generation, their
doings and their thoughts,Noah and his
generation, their doings and their thoughts,
and the generation of the flood, their doings
and their thoughts, Shem and his generation,
their doings and their thoughts, Nimrod and
the generation of the confusion of tongues,
and his generation, their doings and their
thoughts, Abraham and his generation, their
doings and their thoughts, Isaac and his
generation, their doings and their thoughts,
Ishmael and his generation, their doings and
their thoughts, Jacob and his generation,
their doings and their thoughts, Joseph and
his generation, their doings and their
thoughts, the tribes and their generation,
their doings and their thoughts, Amram and
his generation, their doings and their
thoughts, Moses and his generation, their
doings and their thoughts,
(4) Aaron and Mirjam their works and their
doings, the princes and the elders, their
works and doings, Joshua and his
generation, their works and doings, the
judges and their generation, their works and
doings, Eli and his generation, their works
and doings, "Phinehas, their works and
doings, Elkanah and his generation, their
works and their doings, Samuel and his
generation, their works and doings, the kings
of Judah with their generations, their works
and their doings, the kings of Israel and their
generations, their works and their doings,
the princes of Israel, their works and their
doings; the princes of the nations of the
world, their works and their doings, the
heads of the councils of Israel, their works
and their doings ; the heads of (the councils
in) the nations of the world, their
generations, their works and their doings;
the rulers of Israel and their generation, their
works and their doings ; the nobles of Israel
and their generation, their works and their
doings ; the nobles of the nations of the
world and their generation(s), their works
and their doings; the men of reputation in
Israel, their generation, their works and their
doings ; the judges of Israel, their
generation, their works and their doings ; the
judges of the nations of the world and their
generation, their works and their doings ; the
teachers of children in Israel, their
generations, their works and their doings ;
the teachers of children in the nations of the
world, their generations, their works and
109
their doings; the counsellors (interpreters) of
Israel, their generation, their works and their
doings ; the counsellors (interpreters) of the
nations of the world, their generation, their
works and their doings ; all the prophets of
Israel, their generation, their works and their
doings ; all the prophets of the nations of the
world, their generation, their works and their
doings ;
(5) and all the fights and wars that the
nations 16 of the world wrought against the
people of Israel in the time of their kingdom.
And I saw Messiah, son of Joseph, and his
generation "and their" works and their
doings that they will do against the nations
of the world. And I saw Messiah, son of
David, and his generation, and all the fights
and wars, and their works and their doings
that they will do with Israel both for good
and evil. And I saw all the fights and wars
that Gog and Magog will fight in the days of
Messiah, and all that the Holy One, blessed
be He, will do with them in the time to
come.
 (6)And all the rest of all the leaders of the
generations and all the works of the
generations both in Israel and in the nations
of the world, both what is done and what
will be done hereafter to all generations until
the end of time, (all) were graven on the
Curtain of MAQOM. And I saw all these
things with my eyes; and after I had seen it,
I opened my mouth in praise of MAQOM
(the Divine Majesty) (saying thus, Eccl. viii.
4, 5): "For the King's word hath power (and
who may say unto him: What doest thou?)
Whoso keepeth the commandments shall
know no evil thing". And I said:
(Ps. civ. 24) "O Lord, how manifold are thy
works!".

CHAPTER XLVI
The place of the stars shown to R.
Ishmael
R. Ishmael said : Metatron said to me :
(1) (Come and I will show thee) the space of
the stars a that are standing in Raqia' night
by night in fear of the Almighty (MAQOM)
and (I will show thee) where they go and
where they stand.
(2) I walked by his side, and he took me by
his hand and pointed out all to me with his
fingers. And they were standing on sparks of
flames round the Merkaba of the Almighty
(MAQOM). What did Metatron do? At that
moment he clapped his hands and chased
them off from their place. Forthwith they
flew off on flaming wings, rose and fled
from the four sides of the Throne of the
Merkaba, and (as they flew) he told me the
names of every single one. As it is written
(Ps. cxlvii. 4) :" He telleth the number of the
stars ; he giveth them all their names",
teaching, that the Holy One, blessed be He,
has given a name to each one of them.
(3) And they all enter in counted order under
the guidance of (lit. through, by the hands
of) RAHATIEL to Raqia' ha-shSHamayim
to serve the world. And they go out in
counted order to praise the Holy One,
blessed be He, with songs and hymns,
according as it is written (Ps. xix. i): "The
heavens declare the glory of God".
(4) But in the time to come the Holy One,
blessed be He, will create them anew, as it is
written (Lam. iii. 23): "They are new every
morning". And they open their mouth and
utter a song.
Which is the song that they utter? (Ps. viii.
3): "When I consider thy heavens".
CHAPTER XLVII
Metatron shows R. Ishmael the
spirits
of the punished angels
R. Ishmael said: Metatron said to me:
(1) Come and I will show thee the souls of
the angels and the spirits of the ministering
servants whose bodies have been burnt in
the fire of MAQOM (the Almighty) that
goes forth from his little finger. And they
have been made into fiery coals in the midst
of the fiery river (Nehar di-Nur). But their
spirits and their souls are standing behind
the Shekina.
110
(2) Whenever the ministering angels utter a
song at a wrong timeor as not appointed to
be sung they are burnt and consumed by the
fire of their Creator and by a flame from
their Maker, in the places (chambers) of the
whirlwind, for it blows upon them and
drives them into the Nehar di-Nur; and there
they are made into numerous mountains of
burning coal. But their spirit and their soul
return to their Creator, and all are standing
behind their Master.
(3) And I went by his side and he took me
by his hand ; and he showed me all the souls
of the angels and the spirits of the
ministering servants who were standing
behind the Shekina upon wings of the
whirlwind and walls of fire surrounding
them.
(4) At that moment Metatron opened to me
the gates of the walls within which they
were standing behind the Shekina, And I
lifted up my eyes and saw them, and behold,
the likeness of every one was as (that of)
angels and their wings like birds' (wings),
made out of flames, the work of burning
fire. In that moment I opened my mouth in
praise of MAQOM and said (Ps. xcii. 5):
"How great are
thy works, O Lord ".
CHAPTER XLVIII (A)
Metatron shows R. Ishmael the
Right Hand of the
Most High, now inactive behind
Him, but in the
future destined to work the
deliverance of Israel
R. Ishmael said : Metatron said to me :
(1) Come, and I will show thee the Right
Hand of MAQOM, laid behind (Him)
because of the destruction of the Holy
Temple ; from which all kinds of splendour
and light shine forth and by which the 955
heavens were created ; and whom not even
the Seraphim and the 'Ophannim are
permitted (to behold), until the day of
salvation shall arrive.
(2) And I went by his side and he took me
by his hand and showed
me (the Right Hand of MAQOM), with all
manner of praise, rejoicing and song: and no
mouth can tell its praise, and no eye can
behold it, because of its greatness, dignity,
majesty, glory and beauty.
(3)And not only that, but all the souls of the
righteous who are counted worthy to behold
the joy of Jerusalem, they are standing by it,
praising and praying before it three times
every day, saying (Is.li.9): "Awake, awake,
put on strength, O arm of the Lord"
according as it is written (Is. Ixiii. 12): "He
caused his glorious arm to go at the right
hand of Moses".
(4) In that moment the Right Hand of
MAQOM was weeping. And there went
forth from its five fingers five rivers of tears
and fell down into the great sea and shook
the whole world, according as it is written
(Is. xxiv. 19, 20): "The earth is utterly
broken (1), the earth is clean dissolved (2),
the earth is moved exceedingly (3), the earth
shall stagger like a drunken man (4) and
shall be moved to and fro like a hut (5)",
five times corresponding to the fingers of his
Great Right Hand.
(5) But when the Holy One, blessed be He,
sees, that there is no righteous man in the
generation, and no pious man (Chasid] on
earth, and no justice in the hands of men ;
and (that there is) no man like unto Moses,
and no intercessor as Samuel who could
pray before MAQOM for the salvation and
for the deliverance, and for His Kingdom,
that it be revealed in the whole world; and
for His great Right Hand that He put it
before Himself again to work great salvation
by it for Israel,
(6) then forthwith will the Holy One, blessed
be He, remember His own justice, favour,
mercy and grace : and He will deliver His
great Arm by himself, and His righteousness
will support Him. According as it is written
(Is. lix. 16): "And he saw, that there was no
man" (that is:) like unto Moses who prayed
countless times for Israel in the desert and
averted the (Divine) decrees from them" and
he wondered, that there was no intercessor"
like unto Samuel who intreated the Holy
One, blessed be He, and called unto Him
111
and he answered him and fulfilled his desire,
even if it was not fit (in accordance with the
Divine plan), according as it is written (i
Sam. xii. 17) : "Is it not wheat-harvest today? I will call unto the Lord".
(7) And not only that, but He joined
fellowship with Moses in every place, as it
is written (Ps.xcix.6): "Moses and Aaron
among His priests." And again it is written
(Jer. xv. i): "Though Moses and Samuel
stood before me" (Is. Ixiii. 5): "Mine own
arm brought salvation unto me".
(8) Said the Holy One, blessed be He in that
hour: " How long shall I wait for the
children of men to work salvation according
to their righteousness for my arm? For my
own sake and for the sake of my merit and
righteousness will I deliver my arm and by it
redeem my children from among the nations
of the world.
As it is written (Is. xlviii. n): "For my own
sake will I do it. For how should my name
be profaned".
(9) In that moment will the Holy One,
blessed be He, reveal His Great Arm and
show it to the nations of the world: for its
length is as the length of the world and its
breadth is as the width of the
world. And the appearance of its splendour
is like unto the splendour of the sunshine in
its might, in the summer solstice.
(10) Forthwith Israel will be saved from
among the nations of the world. And
Messiah will appear unto them and He will
bring them up to Jerusalem with great joy.
And not only that but Israel will come from
the four quarters of the World and eat with
Messiah. But the nations of the world shall
not eat with them, as it is written (Is. Hi.
10): "The Lord hath made bare his holy arm
in the eyes of all the nations ; and all the
ends of the earth shall see the salvation of
our God". And again (Deut. xxxii. 12): "The
Lord alone did lead him, and there was no
strange god with him". (Zech. xiv. 9) : "And
the Lord shall be king over all the earth".
CHAPTER XLVIII (cont.) (B)
The Divine Names that go forth
from the Throne of Glory,
crowned and escorted by numerous
angelic hosts through the
heavens and back again to the
Throne the angels sing the
‘Holy’ and the ‘Blessed’
These are the seventy-two names written on
the heart of the Holy One, blessed be He:
SS, SeDeQ {righteousness), SaHPeL SUR
{Is. xxvi. 4}, SBI, SaDdlQ{righteous}, S'Ph,
SHN, SeBa'oTh {Lord of Hosts},ShaDdaY
{God Almighty}, 'eLoHIM {God}, YHWH,
SH, DGUL, W'DOM, SSS", 'YW, 'F, 'HW,
HB, YaH, HW, WWW, SSS, PPP, NN, HH,
HaY {living}, HaY, ROKeB 'aRaBOTh
{riding upon the ‘Araboth’, Ps. Ixviii. 5},
YH, HH, WH, MMM, NNN, HWW, YH,
YHH, HPhS, H'S, 'I, W, S", Z', "', QQQ
{Holy, Holy, Holy}, QShR, BW, ZK,
GINUR, GINURYa’, Y’, YOD, 'aLePh,
H'N, P'P, R'W, YYWy YYW, BBS, DDD,
TTT, KKK, KLL, SYS, 'XT', BShKMLW
{= blessed be the Name of His glorious
kingdom for ever and ever}, completed for
MeLeK HalOLaM {the King of the
Universe], JBRH LB' {the beginning of
Wisdom for the children of men}, BNLK
W" Y {blessed be He who gives strength to
the weary and increaseth strength to them
that have no might, Is. xl. 29}that go forth
(adorned) with numerous crowns of fire with
numerous crowns of flame, with numerous
crowns of chashmal, with numerous crowns
of lightning from before the Throne of
Glory. And with them (there are) thousand
hundreds of power (i.e. powerful angels)
who
escort them like a king with trembling and
dread, with awe and shivering, with honour
and majesty andfear, with terror, with
greatness and dignity, with glory and
strength, with understanding and knowledge
and with a pillar of fire and a pillar of flame
and lightning and their light is as lightnings
of light and with the likeness of the
chashmal.
(2) And they give glory unto them and they
answer and cry before them: Holy, Holy,
Holy.
112
And they roll (convoy) them through every
heaven as mighty and honoured princes.
And when they bring them all back to the
place of the Throne of Glory, then all the
Chayyoth by the Merkaba open their mouth
in praise of His glorious name, saying:
"Blessed be the name of His glorious
kingdom for ever and ever".
CHAPTER XLVIII (cont.) (c)
An Enoch-Metatron piece
ALT 1
 (1) "I seized him, and I took him and I
appointed him" that is Enoch, the son of
Jared, whose name is Metatron
(2) and I took him from among the children
of men
(5) and made him a Throne over against my
Throne. Which is the size of that Throne?
Seventy thousand parasangs (all) of fire.
(9) I committed unto him 70 angels
corresponding to the nations (of the world)
and I gave into his charge all the household
above and below.
(7) And I committed to him Wisdom and
Intelligence more than (to) all the angels.
And I called his name "the LESSER YAH",
whose name is by Gematria 71. And I
arranged for him all the works of Creation.
And I made his power to transcend (lit. I
made for him power more than) all the
ministering angels.
ALT 2
(3) He committed unto Metatron that is
Enoch, the son of Jared all treasuries. And I
appointed him
over all the stores that I have in every
heaven. And I committed into his hands the
keys of each heavenly store.
(4) I made (of) him the prince over all the
princes, and I made (of) him a minister of
my Throne of Glory, to provide for and
arrange the Holy Chayyoth, to wreathe
crowns for them (to crown them with
crowns), to clothe them with honour and
majesty to prepare for them a seat when he
is
sitting on his throne to magnify his glory in
the height.
(5) The height of his stature among all those
(that are) of high stature (is) seventy
thousand parasangs. And I made his glory
great as the majesty of my glory.
(6) and the brilliance of his eyes as the
splendour of the Throne of Glory.
(7) his garment honour and majesty, his
royal crown 500 by 500 parasangs.
ALT 3
(1) Aleph1 I made him strong, I took him, I
appointed him: (namely) Metatron, my
servant who is one (unique) among all the
children of heaven. I made him strong in the
generation of the first Adam. But when I
beheld the men of the generation of the
flood, that they were corrupt, then I went
and removed my Shekina from among them.
And 1 lifted it up on high with the sound of
a trumpet and with a shout, as it is written
(Ps.xlvii. 6): "God is gone up with a shout,
the Lord with the sound of a trumpet".
(2) "And I took him": (that is) Enoch, the
son of Jared, from among them. And I lifted
him up with the sound of a trumpet and with
a tera'a (shout) to the high heavens, to be my
witness together with the Chayyoth by the
Merkaba in the world to come.
(3) I appointed him over all the treasuries
and stores that I have in every heaven. And I
committed into his hand the keys of every
several one.
(4) I made (of) him the prince over all the
princes and a minister of the Throne of
Glory (and) the Halls of 'Araboth: to open
their doors to me, and (of) the Throne of
Glory, to exalt an arrange it; (and I
appointed him over) the Holy Chayyot to
wreathe crowns upon their heads; the
majestic 'Ophannim, to crown them with
strength and glory; the; honoured Kerubim,
to clothe: them in majesty; over the radiant
sparks, to make them to shine with
splendour and brilliance; over the flaming
Seraphim, to cover them with highness; the
Chashmallim of light, to make them radiant
with Light and to prepare the seat for me
every morning as I sit upon the Throne of
Glory. And to extol and magnify my glory
inthe height of my power; (and I have
113
committed unto him) the secrets of above
and the secrets of below (heavenly secrets
and earthly secrets).
(5) I made him higher than all. The height of
his stature, in the midst of all (who are) high
of stature (I made) seventy thousand
parasangs. I made his Throne great by the
majesty of my Throne. And I increased its
glory by the honour of my glory.
(6) I transformed his flesh into torches of
fire, and all the bones of his body into fiery
coals; and I made the appearance of his eyes
as the lightning, and the light of his
eyebrows as the imperishable light. I made
his face bright as the splendour of the sun,
and his eyes as the splendour of the Throne
of Glory.
(7) I made honour and majesty his clothing,
beauty and highness his covering cloak and
a royal crown of 500 by (times) 500
parasangs (his) diadem. And I put upon him
of my honour, my majesty and the
splendour. of my glory that is upon my
Throne of Glory. I called him the LESSER
YHWH, the Prince of the Presence, the
Knower of Secrets: for every secret did I
reveal to him as a father and all mysteries
declared I unto him in uprightness.
(8) I set up his throne at the door of my Hall
that he may sit and judge the heavenly
household on high. And I placed every
prince before him, to receive authority from
him, to perform his will.
(9) Seventy names did I take from (my)
names and called him by them to enhance
his glory.
Seventy princes gave I into his hand, to
command unto them my precepts and my
words in every language:
 to abase by his word the proud to the
ground, and to exalt by the utterance of his
lips the humble to the height ; to smite kings
by his speech, to turn kings away from their
paths, to set up(the) rulers over their
dominion as it is written (Dan.ii. 21): "and
he changeth the times and the seasons, and
to give wisdom unto all the setwise of the
world and understanding (and) knowledge to
all who understand knowledge, as it is griten
(Dan. ii. 21): " and knowledge to them that
know understanding", to reveal to them the
secrets of my words and to teach the decree
of my righteous judgement,
(10) as it is written (Is.Iv. n): “so shall my
word be that goeth forth out of my mouth; it
shall not return unto me void but shall
accomplish (that which I please)". ‘E'eseh’
(I shall accomplish) is not written here, but
"asdh' (he shall accomplish), meaning, that
whatever word and whatever utterance goes
forth from before the Holy One, blessed be
He, Metatron stands and carries it out. And
he establishes the decrees of the Holy One,
blessed be He.
CHAPTER XLVIII (D)
The names of Metatron. The
treasuries of Wisdom opened to
Moses on mount Sinai. The angels
protest against Metatron for
revealing the secrets to Moses and
are answered and rebuked by
God. The chain of tradition and the
power of the transmitted
mysteries to heal diseases
(1) Seventy names has Metatron which the
Holy One, blessed be He, took from his own
name and put upon him. And these they are:
YeHOEL, YaH, YeHOEL, YOPHIEL and
Yophphiel, and 'APHPHIEL and
MaRGeZIEL, GIPpUYEL, Pa'aZIEL, 'A'aH,
PeRIEL, TaTRIEL, TaBKIEL,'W, YHWH,
DH, WHYH, 'eBeD, DiBbURIEL,
'aPh'aPIEL, SPPIEL, PaSPaSIEL,
SeNeGRON, MeTaTRON, SOGDIN,
'ADRIGON, ASUM, SaQPaM, SaQTaM,
MIGON MITTON, MOTTRON,
ROSPHIM, QINOTh, ChaTaTYaH,
DeGaZYaH, PSPYaH, BSKNYH, MZRG,
BaRaD.., MKRKK, MSPRD, ChShG,
ChShB, MNRTTT, BSYRYM, MITMON,
TITMON, PiSQON, SaPhSaPhYaH, ZRCh,
ZRChYaH, B’, BeYaH, HBH BeYaH,
PeLeT, PLTYaH, RaBRaBYaH, ChaS,
ChaSYaH, TaPhTaPhYaH, TaMTaMYaH,
SeHaSYaH, IRURYaH, 'aL'aLYaH,
BaZRIDYaH, SaTSaTKYaH, SaSDYaH,
RaZRaZYAH, BaZRaZYaH, 'aRIMYaH,
SBHYaH, SBIBKHYH, SiMKaM,
114
YaHSeYaH, SSBIBYaH, SaBKaSBeYaH,
QeLILQaLYaH, fKIHHH, HHYH, WH,
WHYH, ZaKklKYaH, TUTRISYaH,
SURYaH, ZeH, PeNIRHYaH, Z1Z’H, GaL
RaZaYYa, MaMLIKYaH, TTYaH, eMeQ,
QaMYaH, MeKaPpeRYaH, PeRISHYaH,
SePhaM, GBIR, GiBbORYaH, GOR,
GORYaH, ZIW, 'OKBaR, the LESSER
YHWH, after the name of his Master, (Ex.
xxiii. 21) "for my name is in him",
RaBIBIEL, TUMIEL, Segansakkiel
('Sagnezagiel' / 'Neganzegael), the Prince of
Wisdom.
(2) And why is he called by the name
Sagnesakiel? Because all the treasuries of
wisdom are committed in his hand.
(3) And all of them were opened to Moses
on Sinai, so that he learnt them during the
forty days, while he was standing
(remaining}: the Torah in the seventy
aspects of the seventy tongues, the Prophets
in the seventy aspects of the seventy
tongues, the Writings in the seventy aspects
of the seventy tongues, ''the Halakas in the
seventy aspects of the seventy tongues, the
Traditions in the seventy aspects of the
seventy tongues, the Haggadas in the
seventy aspects of the seventy tongues and
the Toseftas in the seventy aspects of the
seventy tongues'.
(4) But as soon as the forty days were ended,
he forgot all of them in one moment. Then
the Holy One, blessed be He, called
Yephiphyah, the Prince of the Law, and
(through him) they were given to Moses as a
gift. As it is written (Deut. x. 4): "and the
Lord gave them unto me". And after that it
remained with him. And whence do we
know, that it remained (in his memory) ?
Because it is written (Mai. iv. 4): "
Remember ye the Law of Moses my servant
which I commanded unto him in Horeb for
all Israel, even my statutes and judgements".
The Law of Moses': that is the Tora, the
Prophets and the Writings, 'statutes': that is
the Halakas and Traditions, 'judgements';
that is the Haggadas and the Toseftas. And
all of them were given to Moses on high on
Sinai.
(5) These seventy names (are) a reflection of
the Explicit Name(s) on the Merkaba which
are graven upon the Throne of Glory. For
the Holy One, blessed be He, took from His
Explicit Name(s) and put upon the name of
Metatron: Seventy Names of His by which
the ministering angels call the King of the
kings of kings, blessed be He, in the high
heavens, and twenty-two letters that are on
the ring upon his finger with which are
sealed the destinies of the princes of
kingdoms on high in greatness and power
and with which are sealed the lots of the
Angel of Death, and the destinies of every
nation and tongue.
(6) Said Metatron, the Angel, the Prince of
the Presence; the Angel, the Prince of the
Wisdom; the Angel, the Prince of the
Understanding; the Angel, the Prince of the
Kings; the Angel, the Prince of the Rulers;
the angel, the Prince of the Glory; the angel,
the Prince of the high ones, and of the
princes, the exalted, great and honoured
ones, in heaven and on earth:
(7) "H, the God of Israel, is my witness in
this thing, (that] when I revealed this secret
to Moses, then all the hosts in every heaven
on high raged against me and said to me:
(8) Why dost thou reveal this secret to son
of man, born of woman, tainted and unclean,
a man of a putrefying drop, the secret by
which were created heaven and earth, the
sea and the dry land, the mountains and
hills, the rivers and springs, Gehenna of fire
and hail, the Garden of Eden and the Tree of
Life; and by which were formed Adam and
Eve, and the cattle, and the wild beasts, and
the fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea,
and Behemoth and Leviathan, and the
creeping things, the worms, the dragons of
the sea, and the creeping things of the
deserts; and the Tora and Wisdom and
Knowledge and Thought and the Gnosis of
things above and the fear of heaven. Why
dost thou reveal this to flesh and blood?
I answered them: Because the Holy One,
blessed be He, has given me authority, And
furthermore, I have obtained permission
from the high and exalted Throne, from
which all the Explicit Names go forth with
lightnings of fire and flaming chashmallim.
(9) But they were not appeased, until the
Holy One, blessed be He, rebuked them and
drove them away with rebuke from before
115
him, saying to them: "I delight in, and have
set my love on, and have entrusted and
committed unto Metatron, my Servant,
alone, for he is One (unique) among all the
children of heaven.
(10) And Metatron brought them out from
his house of treasuries and committed them
to Moses, and Moses to Joshua, and Joshua
to the elders, and the elders to the prophets
and the prophets to the men of the Great
Synagogue, and the men of the Great
Synagogue to Ezra and Ezra the Scribe to
Hillel the elder, and Hillel the elder to R.
Abbahu and R. Abbahu to R. Zera, and R.
Zera to the men of faith, and the men of
faith (committed them) to give warning and
to heal by them all diseases that rage in the
world, as it is written (Ex. xv. 26): "If thou
wilt diligently hearken to the voice of the
Lord, thy God, and wilt do that which is
right in his eyes, and wilt give ear to his
commandments, and keep all his statutes, I
will put none of the diseases upon thee,
which I have put upon the Egyptians : for I
am the Lord, that healeth thee".
(Ended and finished. Praise be unto the
Creator of the World.)
116 